CUSTOMER ID

15532722

# Costs and charges - 2024


Generated by Trading 212 Markets Ltd. on 11.03.2025 for the period of 01.01.2024 - 31.12.2024.

The report provides an overview of the costs and charges paid during the year.

## Invest account

Account ID: 35211271


Product costs

All costs and charges related to the financial instruments in your Trading 212 Invest account.



CUSTOMER NAME
Andreas Braxmeier

















1. Trading 212 does not apply such charges, nor incidental or performance fees.

2. External charges such as government fees, Stamp Duty, Financial Transaction Taxes, SEC fee, Withholding Tax, etc.


Investment & Ancillary services costs

All costs and charges for the investment services or ancillary services provided to you, in relation to your Trading 212 Invest account.

















1. Fee for deposits via Cards, GooglePay, Apple Pay or other payment methods (excl. bank transfers).

2. Trading 212 does not apply such charges, nor incidental costs or custody charges.

3. FX Fee applies when you convert funds from one currency to another and on currency conversion trading.


When investing, your capital is at risk. Investments can rise and fall and you may get back less than you invested. Trading 212 is a trading name of Trading 212 UK Ltd.,

[Trading 212 Markets Ltd., Trading 212 AU PTY Ltd. and Trading 212 Ltd. Trading 212 Markets Ltd. is registered in Cyprus (Company number HE 409763). Registered address: 1,](https://efiling.drcor.mcit.gov.cy/DrcorPublic/SearchResults.aspx?name=Trading+212+Markets&number=%25&searchtype=optStartMatch&index=1&tname=%25&sc=0)

Ayias Fylaxeos str., 2nd floor, Office 1, 3025, Limassol, Cyprus. Trading 212 Markets Ltd. is authorised and regulated by the Cyprus Securities and Exchange Commission

[(License number 398/21).](https://www.cysec.gov.cy/en-GB/entities/investment-firms/cypriot/89835/) 1/2


Invest account CUSTOMER ID

15532722


Cumulative effect

The table below shows how the total costs and charges paid during the year affected your returns.



CUSTOMER NAME
Andreas Braxmeier



















1. The sum of your gross yearly returns. Your gross yearly return shows how much your investments have grown or shrunk over the year before accounting for any deposits,

withdrawals or portfolio transfers.

2. Costs and Charges applied during the year.

3. Your returns after costs and charges.

4. Shows by how many percentage points your positive return was reduced because of the total costs and charges paid over the period.


When investing, your capital is at risk. Investments can rise and fall and you may get back less than you invested. Trading 212 is a trading name of Trading 212 UK Ltd.,

[Trading 212 Markets Ltd., Trading 212 AU PTY Ltd. and Trading 212 Ltd. Trading 212 Markets Ltd. is registered in Cyprus (Company number HE 409763). Registered address: 1,](https://efiling.drcor.mcit.gov.cy/DrcorPublic/SearchResults.aspx?name=Trading+212+Markets&number=%25&searchtype=optStartMatch&index=1&tname=%25&sc=0)

Ayias Fylaxeos str., 2nd floor, Office 1, 3025, Limassol, Cyprus. Trading 212 Markets Ltd. is authorised and regulated by the Cyprus Securities and Exchange Commission

[(License number 398/21).](https://www.cysec.gov.cy/en-GB/entities/investment-firms/cypriot/89835/) 2/2


