Edited by:

Joanne DiFrancisco-Donoghue,

New York Institute of Technology,

United States


Reviewed by:

Laura Capranica,

Foro Italico University of Rome, Italy

Ahmed Emara,

Cleveland Clinic, United States


*Correspondence:

Kevin Rudolf

[esport@dshs-koeln.de](mailto:esport@dshs-koeln.de)


Specialty section:

This article was submitted to

Movement Science and Sport

Psychology,

a section of the journal

Frontiers in Sports and Active Living


Received: 08 February 2021

Accepted: 18 January 2022

Published: 14 February 2022


Citation:

Rudolf K, Soffner M, Bickmann P,

Froböse I, Tholl C, Wechsler K and

Grieben C (2022) Media

Consumption, Stress and Wellbeing of

Video Game and eSports Players in

Germany: The eSports Study 2020.

Front. Sports Act. Living 4:665604.

[doi: 10.3389/fspor.2022.665604](https://doi.org/10.3389/fspor.2022.665604)



[ORIGINAL RESEARCH](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#editorial-board)
[published: 14 February 2022](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#editorial-board)
[doi: 10.3389/fspor.2022.665604](https://doi.org/10.3389/fspor.2022.665604)

# Media Consumption, Stress and Wellbeing of Video Game and eSports Players in Germany: The eSports Study 2020


Kevin Rudolf*, Markus Soffner, Peter Bickmann, Ingo Froböse, Chuck Tholl,
Konstantin Wechsler and Christopher Grieben


Movement-Oriented Prevention and Rehabilitation Sciences, Institute of Movement Therapy and Movement-Oriented

Prevention and Rehabilitation, German Sport University Cologne, Cologne, Germany


The popularity of video gaming and eSports is increasing rapidly. However, most research
focuses on the economical features and psychological consequences of gaming and
only little is known about the health behavior of the players. Therefore, this study is
a follow-up of the eSports Study 2019 and further investigates the health and health
behavior of video game and eSports players in Germany. This cross-sectional study,
conducted between April and September 2019, includes 1038 players (91.2% male;
23.0 ± 5.4 years; body mass index: 24.8 ± 5.0 kg/m [2] ) who provided data regarding
their health status, physical activity, sleep, media consumption, stress and wellbeing
via a web-based survey. Descriptive statistics were performed on all questions. Linear
regressions were used to examine the relation between media consumption, wellbeing
and stress. Almost all respondents classified their health status as “good” or better
(92.5%). The average sedentary and physical activity time was 7.2 ± 3.5 h/day and
8.8 ± 10.7 h/week, respectively. Respondents slept for 7.5 ± 1.3 h/night on weekdays
and for 8.5 ± 1.5 h/night on weekends, but many were “sometimes” or more frequently
overtired (53.1%). Daily duration of playing video games (230.4 ± 159.3 min/day) and
watching livestreams and videos with (102.6 ± 101.7 min/day) and without gaming
content (72.9 ± 88.5 min/day) were much higher than watching regular television (18.9
± 49.1 min/day) or reading analog media (32.1 ± 53.5 min/day). In terms of stress
and wellbeing, most players reported low stress levels (13.8 ± 5.7) and reached a
moderate average score of 60.1 ± 16.4 out of 100 points in the WHO-5 Well-Being Index.
Linear regressions revealed no relevant significant associations. The results indicate good
subjective health and health behavior of the target group. However, the high amounts of
screen-based media-consumption, as well as the moderate stress and wellbeing levels
show potential for improvement. In addition, the target group consumed high amounts of
digital media in reference to gaming, while traditional media consumption was distinctly
low. Consequently, media campaigns that address health promotion in this target group
should use the platforms of digital media instead.


Keywords: gaming, health, media usage, physical activity, sleep



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 1 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



INTRODUCTION


Video gaming and competitive video gaming, also known as
eSports, have been gaining global attention in recent years.
Various structures such as federations and organizations are
emerging, global companies are investing in eSports and general
gaming, as well as eSports, is becoming increasingly popular
in society as a recreational activity. The numbers of the global
eSports audience and active eSports players are rising every
year (Newzoo, 2020b). According to a current market report
(Newzoo, 2020a), the global eSports audience will grow to 495
million people in 2020. The current COVID-19 pandemic could
accelerate this trend: most recent studies show a significant
increase in gaming and screen-based activities during the
pandemic (Colley et al., 2020; DAK Gesundheit, 2020).
The growing interest in video gaming and eSports has also
resulted in some significant downsides. Due to the potentially
addictive characteristics of excessive gaming, the World Health
Organization (WHO) came to include gaming disorder as a
diagnosable disorder in the 11th International Classification of
Diseases (ICD-11) in 2018 (World Health Organization, 2020).
Further issues with video gaming include the large amounts
of sitting and screen time associated with the activity (Twenge
and Campbell, 2018; DiFrancisco-Donoghue et al., 2019). Sitting
and screen time are already recognized as risk factors for
numerous chronic diseases (Biswas et al., 2015; Patterson et al.,
2018; Bailey et al., 2019) and all-cause mortality (Chau et al.,
2013; Biswas et al., 2015; Rezende et al., 2016; Patterson et al.,
2018). Sitting (Lissak, 2018) and screen time (Reid Chassiakos
et al., 2016; Akçay and Akçay, 2018) also show negative impacts
on sleep behavior. While a sedentary lifestyle can lead to
sleep disturbances and insomnia (Yang et al., 2017), the blue
light emission of screens can influence the circadian rhythm
(Hatori et al., 2017), which results in poor sleeping patterns and
impoverished health-related quality of life (Mireku et al., 2019).
Moreover, prolonged screen time is associated with poor stress
regulation (Lissak, 2018), which is additionally a reason for poor
sleep (Âkerstedt, 2006). On the positive side, playing video games
can also contribute to relaxation (Hoffman and Nadelson, 2009),
reduce stress and improve mood (Russoniello et al., 2009).
One question is whether screen-based video gaming and
eSports have a negative impact on players’ health and sleep per se.
In order to provide specific health promotion to the target group,
collecting data about the current situation of video game and
eSports players in terms of health behavior and health status is
pivotal. Hence, the aim of this exploratory study is to investigate
the media usage, sleep behavior, stress and wellbeing of video
game and eSports players and its association with health.


MATERIALS AND METHODS


Study Design and Setting
The current study is a follow-up of the eSports Study 2019
(Rudolf et al., 2020) and was carried out as a cross-sectional
online survey. The survey was distributed via the projectrelated website (esportwissen.de, 2017), social media (Facebook,
Instagram, Discord), various video game and eSports related



platforms, as well as in-person during live events (ESL One
Cologne, ESL Spring Championship, L’Oréal Charcoal Cup). In
addition, the authors’ contacts to eSport organizations were used
to further disseminate the study. In order to recruit potential
participants, an explanation of the aim of the study, eligibility
criteria and an incentive (chance to win one out of five e25
Amazon vouchers) were given during the distribution. The data
collection took place from April 5 to September 13, 2019.
The ethical committee of the German Sport University
Cologne approved the study (reference: 053/2018).


Participants
Participants were eligible for the study if they were living in
Germany, understood the German language and were actively
playing video games or eSports. At the beginning of the survey,
an information sheet specifying the purpose of the study was
displayed and consent to participate was obtained. Afterwards,
a filter question was displayed to verify the current country of
residence. For participants who did not live in Germany, the
survey ended and they were excluded.


Measures
The questionnaire was designed to examine video game and
eSports players in terms of demographics, video gaming behavior,
media usage, health behavior, stress and wellbeing. It was
administered via the online survey tool Unipark (Questback
GmbH, Cologne, Germany). The questionnaire contained a total
of 41–43 questions, depending on participants’ answers to the
filter questions.
Initially, demographic data such as age, gender, education and
employment status of the participants, as well as information on
body weight and height were collected. Wording and rating of
these questions were designed in accordance with the standards
of the German Federal Statistical Office (Beckmann et al., 2016).
The questions regarding the data on gaming behavior and
media usage were self-designed, considering that no appropriate
and validated questionnaire was available. Participants were
asked to first classify their player status as:


- Professional players (regularly earning significant revenue
from eSports, such as prize money, sponsors, salary
from clubs),

- former professionals (used to be an eSport professional, but are
no longer),

- amateurs (playing eSports, but without earning a significant
amount of money),

- regular players (playing video games or eSports more than
once a week, but without taking part in official tournaments
and leagues),

- occasional players (playing video games several times a month
or less, and without participating in official tournaments
and leagues),

- non-players.


The non-players were excluded from all analyses. If participants
were amateurs, former professional players or professional
players, they received an additional question about their income
from price money or player salaries in the last 12 months:



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 2 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020




- “no income,”

- “1–500e,”

- “501–1,000e,”

- “1,001–2,500e,”

- “2,501–5,000e,”

- “5,001–10,000e,”

- “more than 10,000e,”

- “prefer not to say.”


Furthermore, all players were asked about their favorite eSports
genre (semi-open-ended question) and had to specify how much
time they usually spent on the following media each day (hours
and minutes):


- “playing eSports games,”

- “playing other video games,”

- “watching live-streams and videos on demand (VOD) with
gaming-related content,”

- “watching live streams and videos on demand (VOD) without
gaming-related content,”

- “communicating via messenger services or voice chat,”

- “using social media,”

- “browsing the web,”

- “watching television,”

- “listening to music/radio,”

- “reading print media.”


To avoid excessive entries, the hours were limited to 23 and the
minutes to 59 in this section.
The questions on health behavior refer to the last 4 weeks.
These include:


- Overall health status (5-point rating scale: “poor,” “fair,”
“good,” “very good,” “excellent”),

- Duration of moderate to vigorous physical activity (hours
per week),

- Duration of sedentary time (hours per day),

- Average time of falling asleep on weekdays and the weekends
(hours and minutes),

- Average time of getting up on weekdays and the weekends
(hours and minutes),

- Number of awakenings during the night.


Physical activity was described as activities in which the
pulse rate increased at least slightly or participants became
slightly out of breath. Examples given were cycling, fitness
training, playing soccer or climbing stairs. This includes
physical activities at work as well as during leisure time.
Sedentary time was recorded as sitting or resting, excluding
nighttime sleep.
Concluding this topic, participants were asked how often the
following statements about behaviors and emotional states with
reference to gaming and eSports applied to them (7-point rating
scale: “never,” “rarely,” “sometimes,” “several times,” “often,” “very
often,” “always”). Wording and rating of these questions were
designed with reference to the EBF-24 A/3 (Kallus and Kellmann,
2016):


- “went to bed later than planned because of the game,”

- “thought about the game during the day,”




- “thought about the game when going to sleep,”

- “got tired of the game,”

- “had a good time with friends in the game,”

- “had a good time with friends away from the game,”

- “slept restlessly,”

- “were overtired,”

- “couldn’t fall asleep because of the game.”


The last part of the questionnaire consisted of the entire versions
of the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS; Cohen et al., 1983) and WHOFive Well-Being Index (WHO-5; WHO, 1998). While the PSS
measures the individual stress perception, the WHO-5 assesses
individual wellbeing. Both questionnaires were demonstrated
to be valid and reliable tools for research (Topp et al., 2015;
Bastianon et al., 2020).


Data Analyses
Data were examined for completeness, consistency and
plausibility. Participants were excluded from all analyses if
their data was inconsistent (e.g., reporting to be a high school
student with a Bachelor degree) or implausible (reporting daily
sleep time <4 or > 16 h). One missing value was allowed for
each of the topics on demographics, video gaming behavior,
media usage and health behavior, but the respective participants
were excluded from the analyses of the respective question.
Missing values within the PSS and WHO-5 resulted in exclusion
of the participants from the analyses of the respective topic.
Participants who did not provide information on height or
weight were excluded from all analyses.
The body mass index (BMI) was calculated weight and height
of the participants. Additionally, the duration of “playing eSports
games” and “playing other video games” was summarized as
“active gaming overall”. The sleep duration on weekdays and
weekends was calculated for everyone based on the respective
time of getting up and going to bed.
Following the manual, the points from the WHO-5 were
summed up and multiplied by four to obtain the final score
(Mental Health Services, n. d.). Whilst a higher WHO-5 score
indicates a healthier wellbeing of the person, a value below 50
marks questionable scores and further medical examinations
should be sought (Topp et al., 2015). Scores of the PSS
questionnaire were calculated according to the manual (Cohen
et al., 1983; Klein et al., 2016).
Descriptive statistics were applied to all data. For each
player status, numerical data were described by means and
standard deviations, ordinal and nominal data by frequencies.
All data were checked for normal distribution. If a nonnormal distribution was present, statistical differences between
the groups or between two time points were calculated by
the Kruskal-Wallis-test, Fisher’s exact test or Wilcoxon-test.
Otherwise, an ANOVA was performed. Post-hoc tests with
Bonferroni-correction were performed if overall group
differences were statistically significant. Multiple linear
regressions were performed to investigate possible associations
between the different forms of media usage and wellbeing, stress
and duration of sleep on weekdays and weekends. Furthermore,
multiple linear regressions were performed between lifestyle



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 3 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



factors (e.g., total screentime, sleep data, physical activity) and
wellbeing, and subjective health status. For this purpose, media
usage variables with screentime were summarized and health
status was recoded into a dichotomous characteristic with the
parameters “good or better” and “bad or worse”. The level of
significance for all analyses was set at p < 0.05. All statistical
analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics 26 (IBM
Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).


RESULTS


Participants
The flow chart of the participation progress is depicted in
**Figure 1** . Thus, the total sample consists of 1,038 (42.9% of all
unique site viewers) participants, of which 26 are professional


FIGURE 1 | Flow chart of the participation progress.


TABLE 1 | Sample characteristics.



players, 36 former professional players, 282 amateurs, 545 regular
players and 149 occasional players (see **Table 1** ).


Demographic Data
**Table 1** displays the demographic data of the remaining
participants, classified by player status. The majority of
participants in the sample were between 20 and 30 years old,
predominantly male (n = 947; 91.2%) and well-educated. Two
thirds of the participants were university students (n = 300;
28.9%) or working in full-time jobs (n = 343; 33.0%), while the
other third were pupils (n = 151; 14.5%) and apprentices (n =
143; 13.8%). Overall, the average BMI of the sample was 24.8
m [2] /kg, which can be classified as normal weight.


Health Behavior
Most of the participants reported an “excellent” (n = 130; 12.8%),
“very good” (n = 397; 39.0%) or “good” (n = 414; 40.7%) health
status. Only a few had a “fair” (n = 74; 7.3%) or “poor” (n = 3;
0.3%) health status ( **Table 2** ).
Overall, the participants reported to be physically active for
about 8.8 (± 10.7) hours per week and the majority (n = 819;
80.5%) exceeded the WHO recommendations of 2.5 h of physical
activity per week. The average amount of sedentary time was 7.2
(± 12.4) hours per day. No statistically significant differences
between player groups were found in the data on health behavior.
**Table 3** presents the results on sleeping patterns. While the
total sample spent an average of 7.5 ± 1.3 h/night asleep
on weekdays, occasional players (7.9 ± 1.1 h/night) slept
significantly longer than former professionals (7.1 ± 1.5 h/night;
p = 0.04), amateurs (7.4 ± 1.4 h/night; p < 0.01) and regular
players (7.5 ± 1.3 h/night; p < 0.01). On weekends (8.5 ± 1.5),
the total sample slept ∼1 h longer than on weekdays (7.5 ± 1.3,
p < 0.01). During the night, all participants woke up more than
once on average, and the regular players (1.2 ± 1.9 h/night) woke
up significantly less often than the occasional players (1.6 ± 2.1
h/night; p = 0.02).



Group Age [a] (years) Gender [b] (“male”) BMI [a] (kg/m **²** ) Education [b] (“higher education
Mean (SD) n (%) Mean (SD) entrance qualification or
higher”)
n (%)



Employment [b] (“full-time
employment”)
n (%)



Total sample 23.0 (5.4) 947 (91.2) 24.8 (5.0) 569 (54.9) 343 (33.0)
(n = 1,038)

Professional players (n = 26) 20.9 (3.3) [O,F] 24 (92.3) 23.9 (4.2) 14 (52.9) 3 (11.5) [F,R,O]

Former professional players (n = 36) 26.6 (4.2) [P,A,R] 36 (100.0) [O] 26.4 (5.3) 19 (52.8) 21 (58.3) [P,A,R,O]

Amateurs 22.1 (4.7) [O,F] 274 (97.2) [R,O] 25.1 (5.3) 152 (53.9) 79 (28.0) [F,O]
(n = 282)

Regular players (n = 545) 22.9 (5.5) [O,F] 495 (90.8) [A,O] 24.7 (5.2) 292 (53.6) 183 (33.6) [P,F]

Occasional players 24.5 (5.9) [P,A,R] 118 (79.2) [F,A,R] 24.5 (4.0) 92 (61.7) 57 (38.3) [P,F,A]
(n = 149)


Sig. <0.01 <0.01 0.10 0.49 <0.01


aKruskal-Wallis test.
bFisher’s exact test. Superscript letters indicate statistically significant (p < 0.05) differences to other groups in the same column: Pprofessional players; F former professional players;
Aamateurs; Rregular players; Ooccasional players.


[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 4 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



With regards to the information on restless sleep, the majority
of players specified “never” (n = 271; 28.9%), “rarely” (n = 384;
41.0%) or “sometimes” (n = 170; 18.1%). Furthermore, about half
reported that they were “sometimes” (n = 264; 28.2%) or more
often (n = 234; 24.9%) overtired.


Media Usage
The media usage of the sample is displayed in **Figures 2** - **4** . The
average total media usage time of professional eSports players


TABLE 2 | Data on players’ health behavior.



Group Health status [a]

(Mode)
n (%)



Physical
activity [b]

(hours/week)
Mean (SD)



was the highest (1,140.0 ± 474.8 min/day). However, only the
usage time of occasional players (806.2 ± 564.0 min/day) was
statistically significantly lower than those of all other player
groups (p < 0.05). Additionally, the amateurs (1,066 ± 610.2
min/day) spent significantly more time on media than the regular
players (928.6 ± 526.0 min/day; p = 0.019).
The most frequented medium was active gaming overall
(230.4 ± 159.3 min/day). The favorite game genres were tactical
shooters, followed by multiplayer online battle arenas and sports
and racing simulations ( **Table 4** ).
Regarding the time spent with gaming, statistically significant
differences were found between the player groups (see **Figure 2** ).
For example, eSports professionals played the most, especially
eSports games (285.8 ± 16.7 min/day). In relation to former
professionals (171.6 ± 146.0 min/day; p = 0.04) and the regular
players (60 ± 85.3 min/day; p < 0.01), they played significantly
more eSports games. Concerning watching VODs with gaming
reference, only the occasional players (74.3 ± 84.8 min/day)
differed from the regular players (104.6 ± 104 min/day; p <
0.001) and amateurs (114.6 ± 105.7 min/day; p < 0.001).
As seen in **Figure 3**, the time spent with VODs without
gaming reference (72.9 ± 88.5 min/day) is lower than with
gaming reference (102.5 ± 101.7 min/day; p < 0.001). Regarding
the online non-gaming media, messaging accounts for the
highest time span (182.5± 185.2 min/day), followed by the use
of social media (86.6 ± 124.6 min/day). The professional players
(260 ± 186.6 min/day) communicated via messenger services
significantly more often than the occasional players (170.2 ±
179.5 min/day; p = 0.05) and regular players did (142.5 ± 155.1
min/day; p = 0.01). Likewise, the use of social media was highest
among professional players (152.0 ± 141.8 min/day) and differed
significantly from occasional (80.6 ± 116.5 min/day; p = 0.01)
and regular players’ usage (78.1 ± 109.8 min/day; p = 0.01).



Sedentary time [a]

(hours/day)
Mean (SD)



Total sample “good” 8.8 (10.7) 7.2 (3.5)
(n = 1,018*) 414 (40.7)


Professional players “good” 7.3 (7.7) 6.2 (4.3)
(n = 26) 12 (46.2)



Former professional
players
(n = 36)



“good” 10.3 (13.2) 7.0 (3.5)
15 (41.7)



Amateurs “good” 8.7 (9.6) 7.3 (3.6)
(n = 276) 115 (40.8)


Regular players “good” 9.0 (11.4) 7.3 (3.4)
(n = 534) 220 (40.4)


Occasional players “very good” 8.5 (9.9) 7.0 (3.5)
(n = 146) 69 (46.3)


Sig. 0.90 0.83 0.46


aKruskal-Wallis Test.
2ANOVA.
*In these three categories, 20 data sets were incomplete.


TABLE 3 | Sleep outcomes.



Overtired [a]

(Mode)
n (%)



Group Sleep time weekdays [a]

(hours/night)
Mean (SD)



Sleep time weekends [a]

(hours/night)
Mean (SD)



Waking up at
night [a]

Mean (SD)



Restless sleep [a]

(Mode)
n (%)



Total sample 7.5 (1.3) 8.5 (1.5) 1.3 (2.2) “rarely” “rarely”
(n = 937*) 384 (41.0) 314 (33.5)


Professional players 7.9 (1.7) 8.4(1.4) 1.3 (2.4) “rarely” “rarely”
(n = 21) 10 (47.6) 7 (33.3)
“sometimes”
7 (33.3)

Former professional players 7.1 (1.5) [O] 8.0 (1.4) 1.3 (1.6) “rarely” “rarely”
(n = 32) 15 (46.9) 11 (34.4)

Amateurs 7.4 (1.4) [O] 8.4 (1.5) 1.4 (2.8) “rarely” “rarely”
(n = 246) 93 (37.8) 87 (35.4)

Regular players 7.5 (1.3) [O] 8.5 (1.5) 1.2 (1.9) [O] “rarely” “rarely”
(n = 502) 207 (41.2) 175 (34.9)

Occasional players 7.9 (1.1) [A,R,F] 8.6 (1.3) 1.6 (2.1) [R] “rarely” “sometimes”
(n = 136) 59 (43.4) 46 (33.8)


Sig. <0.01 0.09 0.02 0.54 0.54


aKruskal-Wallis; Superscript letters indicates statistically significant (p < 0.05) differences to other groups in the same column.
Pprofessional players; F former professional players; Aamateurs; Rregular players; Ooccasional players.
*In these five categories, 70 data sets were inconsistent or incomplete.


[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 5 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020


FIGURE 2 | Average consumption of gaming related media per day. *Superscript letters indicate statistically significant (p < 0.05) differences to other groups by
Kruskal-Wallis test. [P] professional players; [F] former professional players; [A] amateurs; [R] regular players; [O] occasional players. VOD, Live-streams/videos on demand.


FIGURE 3 | Average consumption of online media without gaming reference per day. *Superscript letters indicate statistically significant (p < 0.05) differences to other
groups by Kruskal-Wallis test. [P] professional players; [F] former professional players; [A] amateurs; [R] regular players; [O] occasional players. VOD, Live-streams/videos on
demand.



Traditional media consumption was the lowest in the sample
( **Figure 4** ). While music and radio (143.8 ± 156.3 min/day)
were consumed approximately as much as online media,
watching television (18.9 ± 49.1 min/day) and reading analog
media (32.1 ± 53.5 min/day) scored much lower. Statistically
significant differences were present between occasional players
(60.63 ± 85.3 min/day) and regular players (149.2 ± 109.3



min/day; p = 0.02) and amateurs (15.2 ± 46.5 min/day;
p = 0.01).


PSS and WHO-5
**Table 5** displays the results of the WHO-5 and PSS
questionnaires. No statistically significant differences between
the player groups were found in both questionnaires.



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 6 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020


FIGURE 4 | Average consumption of traditional media without gaming reference per day. *Superscript letters indicate statistically significant (p < 0.05) differences to
other groups by Kruskal-Wallis test. [P] professional players; [F] former professional players; [A] amateurs; [R] regular players; [O] occasional players.



TABLE 4 | Prioritized game genres (n = 1,038).


Game genres Frequency n (%)


Tactical shooters 581 (56.0)


Multiplayer online battle arenas 197 (19.0)


Sport and racing simulations 90 (8.7)


Battle royales 58 (5.6)


Massively multiplayer online role playing games 28 (2.7)


Real time strategy games 21 (2.0)


Collecting card games 12 (1.2)


Mobile games 12 (1.2)


Fighting games 4 (0.4)


Others 35 (3.4)


Associations With Media Usage
Statistically significant minor associations between media usage
and the sleep time on weekdays [F(13,935) = 3.89, p < 0.001]
as well as on weekends [F(13,948) = 2.81, p < 0.01] were found
( **Tables 6** - **9** ). Accordingly, sleep was 6 min shorter on weekdays
for every hour of non-eSports video game time. Additionally,
the participants slept 6 min less for every hour they were using
social media on weekdays. In contrast, sleep was 6 min longer
for every hour of watching VODs without gaming reference.
During weekends, the participants slept 6 min less for every hour
of browsing the internet.
Furthermore, statistically significant minor correlations
between media usage and the PSS scores were found [F(13,978) =
4.48, p < 0.001]. Therefore, the score of the PSS increased by 4.8



TABLE 5 | Scores and classifications of the WHO-5 and PSS questionnaire.



WHO-5 Score [a]

(1–100)
Mean (SD)



PSS Score [a]

(0–40)
Mean (SD)



Total sample (n = 1,038) 60.1 (16.4) 13.8 (57)


Professional players (n = 26) 62.2 (16.1) 14.0 (5.4)


Former professional players (n = 36) 61.6 (19.3) 13.3 (5.3)


Amateurs (n = 282) 61.1 (15.3) 13.0 (5.5)


Regular players (n = 545) 60.1 (16.5) 14.0 (5.6)


Occasional players (n = 149) 57.9 (16.9) 14.6 (6.3)


Sig. 0.08 0.14


aKruskal-Wallis Test.


for every hour which the participants spent playing non-eSports
video games.
There are also significant correlations between media usage
and the WHO-5 [F(13,978) = 2.36, p < 0.01]. In this case, the
final score of the WHO-5 increased by 0.6 for every hour the
participants spent playing eSport video games, and by 1.8 for
every hour spent on analog media.
Statistically significant minor associations between lifestyle
factors and wellbeing [F(9,939) = 5.87, p < 0.001] as well as
the subjective health status [χ [2] (9) [=][ 68.01,][ p][ <][ 0.01] were]
found ( **Tables 10**, **11** ). Accordingly, increased sitting time, BMI
and sleep on weekends have a small negative impact on
wellbeing. Longer sleep on weekdays has a positive impact on the
participants’ wellbeing. In line with this, longer sitting time and
higher BMI also have a small negative impact on subjective health



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 7 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



TABLE 6 | Multiple regression: media usage in relation to sleep on weekdays.


Variables B SE Beta 95% CI (lower; Sig.
upper limit)


Playing eSport games −0.04 0.03 −0.05 −0.10; 0.01 0.14
(min/day)


Playing other video −0.109 0.03 −0.09 −0.16; −0.03 0.01
games (min/day)



TABLE 7 | Multiple regression: media usage in relation to sleep on weekends.


Variables B SE Beta 95% CI (lower; Sig.
upper limit)


Playing eSport games −0.03 0.03 −0.03 −0.09; 0.03 0.34
(min/day)


Playing other video <0.01 0.04 <0.01 −0.07; 0.08 0.93
games (min/day)



Watching live-streams
and videos (VOD) with
gaming related content
(min/day)


Watching live streams
and videos (VOD)
without gaming-related
content (min/day)


Communicating via
messenger services or
voice chat (min/day)



0.03 0.03 0.03 −0.04; 0.09 0.44


0.09 0.04 0.08 0.02; 0.16 0.02


−0.01 0.02 −0.02 −0.05; 0.03 0.53



Watching live-streams
and videos (VOD) with
gaming related content
(min/day)


Watching live streams
and videos (VOD)
without gaming-related
content (min/day)


Communicating via
messenger services or
voice chat (min/day)



<0.01 0.04 <0.01 −0.07; 0.08 0.97


0.02 0.04 0.02 −0.06; 0.10 0.59


−0.02 0.02 −0.03 −0.06; 0.02 0.38



Using social media −0.06 0.03 −0.08 −0.12;< −0.01 0.04
(min/day)


Browsing the web <0.01 0.03 0.00 −0.06; 0.06 0.94
(min/day)


Watching television 0.11 0.07 0.06 −0.02; 0.25 0.09
(min/day)


Listening to −0.03 0.02 −0.05 −0.07; 0.01 0.12
music/radio (min/day)


Reading print media <0.01 0.06 <0.01 −0.12; 0.12 0.98
(min/day)


Age (years) −0.47 0.63 −0.03 −1,71; 0.78 0.46


Gender (male = 1; −5.65 10.83 −0.02 −26.90; 15.60 0.60
female = 2)

BMI (kg/m [2] ) −2.14 0.64 −0.11 −3.39; −0.89 <0.01


Dependent variable: sleep on weekdays (min/day), n = 949; p < 0.001, adjusted
R [2] = 0.038.


status. In addition, significant associations between a good health
status and higher levels of physical activity were found.


DISCUSSION


Key Results
The current study aimed at providing insights into the health
behavior and media usage of video game and eSports players
in Germany. Data from more than 1,000 players indicate that
the general state of health is decent and the vast majority of
players claim to be sufficiently physically active, but especially
consumption of digital media is high. In terms of sleep, stress and
wellbeing, the study shows strikingly positive results, although
there may be room for further improvement.


Demographics
In line with previous studies on gaming and eSports, the results
of the present study show that video game and eSport players
are predominantly young, male and well-educated (Rudolf et al.,
2020). Similar to the average population, the participants had
a normal BMI (Statistisches Bundesamt, 2017) and moderate
sitting times (Clemes et al., 2016; Froböse et al., 2018). The



Using social media −0.05 0.03 −0.06 −0.11; 0.02 0.13
(min/day)


Browsing the web −0.09 0.04 −0.09 −0.15; −0.02 0.01
(min/day)


Watching television 0.09 0.07 0.04 −0.06; 0.23 0.24
(min/day)


Listening to −0.01 0.02 −0.02 −0.06; 0.04 0.66
music/radio (min/day)


Reading print media −0.13 0.07 −0.07 −0.26; <0.01 0.06
(min/day)


Age (years) −1.74 0.70 −0.09 −3.12; −0.36 0.01


Gender (male = 1; −5.80 12.25 −0.02 −29.85; 18,24 0.64
female = 2)

BMI (kg/m [2] ) −0.04 0.72 <-0.01 −1.46; 1.37 0.95


Dependent variable: sleep on weekends (min/day), n = 962; p < 0.01, adjusted
R [2] = 0.024.


majority of the sample consisted of students, apprentices and
pupils, and, in the context of their current lifestyles, most
performed prolonged sedentary activities in their everyday life.
Besides, the participants spent many hours playing video games,
which is mostly done while sitting. Considering this, the sitting
times are actually surprisingly low. Equally positive is the fact
that the participants exceeded the WHO recommendations for
physical activity of 2.5 h per week (World Health Organization,
2010) by a lot. In comparison to the general German population,
more than twice as many percent of participants were sufficiently
physically active (Finger et al., 2017). Accordingly, the data
disproves the established clichés about video game and eSport
players which claim that they are sedentary and physically
inactivemost of the time. To substantiate these results, more
objective measures of health and activity behaviors like physical
examinations, fitness trackers or comparable devices could be
included in future research.


Sleep Outcomes
Video game and eSport players can still improve with regard
to sleep and the regeneration phase. Overall, the participants
had similar sleep durations as the German population (Feld



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 8 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



TABLE 8 | Multiple regression: media usage in relation to perceived stress scale
score.


Variables B SE Beta 95% CI (lower; Sig.
upper limit)


Playing eSport games <0.01 <0.01 <-0.01 <-0.01; <0.01 0.90
(min/day)


Playing other video 0.01 <0.01 0.13 <0.01; 0.01 <0.01
games (min/day)



TABLE 9 | Multiple regression: media usage in relation to the WHO-5 scores.


Variables B SE Beta 95% CI (lower; Sig.
upper limit)


Playing eSport games <0.01 0.01 0.09 <0.01; 0.02 0.01
(min/day)


Playing other video <-0.01 0.01 −0.02 −0.01; 0.01 0.64
games (min/day)



Watching live-streams
and videos (VOD) with
gaming related content
(min/day)


Watching live streams
and videos (VOD)
without gaming-related
content (min/day)


Communicating via
messenger services or
voice chat (min/day)



<-0.01 0.01 −0.02 −0.01; 0.01 0.67


−0.01 0.01 −0.04 −0.02; <0.01 0.20


<-0.01 <0.01 −0.03 −0.01; <0.01 0.50



Watching live-streams
and videos (VOD) with
gaming related content
(min/day)


Watching live streams
and videos (VOD)
without gaming-related
content (min/day)


Communicating via
messenger services or
voice chat (min/day)



<0.01 <0.01 0.03 <-0.01; 0.01 0.35


<0.01 <0.01 0.05 <-0.01; 0.01 0.14


<-0.01 <0.01 −0.03 <-0.01; <0.01 0.46



Using social media <0.01 <0.01 0.04 <-0.01; 0.01 0.24
(min/day)


Browsing the web <0.01 <0.01 <0.01 <-0.01; <0.01 0.97
(min/day)


Watching television <0.01 <0.01 0.01 <-0.01; 0.01 0.68
(min/day)


Listening to <-0.01 <0.01 −0.04 <-0.01; <0.01 0.19
music/radio (min/day)


Reading print media <-0.01 <0.01 −0.04 −0.01; <0.01 0.27
(min/day)


Age(years) −0.06 0.04 −0.06 −0.13; 0.01 0.10


Gender (male = 1; 3.31 0.65 0.16 2.04; 4.58 <0.01
female = 2)

BMI (kg/m [2] ) 0.05 0.04 0.04 0.03; 0.12 0.20


Dependent variable: perceived stress scale score, n = 992; p < 0.001, adjusted
R [2] = 0.044.


and Young, 2017), but still do not fulfil the recommendations
of 8–10 and 7–9 h per night for teenagers and (young) adults,
respectively (Hirshkowitz et al., 2015). In addition, more than
the half reported that they were overtired at least some of
the time. A persistent fatigue can lead to numerous negative
health consequences and the general performance decreases
(Fortier-Brochu et al., 2010; Lock et al., 2018), which impacts all
areas of life. Reduced cognitive performance, impaired metabolic
processes and mental health problems are only some examples
(Lock et al., 2018). The impaired sleep patterns may be caused
by the blue light emission of screens, which has an influence on
the circadian rhythm (Hatori et al., 2017). In our study, a small
connection between certain types of media and sleep could be
observed. Accordingly, participants slept less when they spent
more time playing non-eSports games or dealt with social media.
Reduced sleep time, in turn, tended to be associated with lower
wellbeing. However, these correlations were only apparent on
weekdays. More so, this does not specify any ultimate conclusion
about the sleep quality itself. The extent to which associations
between video gaming and sleep can be found has not yet been
sufficiently proven (Huard Pelletier et al., 2020). A reduction
in screen time should be kept in mind, especially before going



Using social media <0.01 0.01 0.02 −0.01; 0.01 0.52
(min/day)


Browsing the web −0.01 0.01 −0.05 −0.02; <0.01 0.22
(min/day)


Watching television −0.01 0.01 −0.02 −0.03; 0.02 0.53
(min/day)


Listening to <0.01 <0.01 0.03 <-0.01; 0.01 0.39
music/radio (min/day)


Reading print media 0.03 0.01 0.08 0.01; 0.05 0.02
(min/day)


Age (years) −0.02 0.11 −0.01 −0.22; 0.19 0.89


Gender (male = 1; −5.12 1.87 −0.09 −8.79; −1.45 0.01
female = 2)

BMI (kg/m [2] ) −0.27 0.11 −0.08 −0.49; −0.06 0.01


Dependent variable: WHO-5 score, n = 992; p < 0.01, adjusted R [2] = 0.017.


to bed, as this can affect sleep and wellbeing (Hale and Guan,
2015). These relationships need further research, particularly
with regard to sleep quality and differences between weekday
and weekend sleep patterns. Nevertheless, the study emphasized
that almost the half of the participants are never or only rarely
overtired. They may compensate for the lack of sleep during the
week during the weekends, considering that participants sleep 1 h
longer on average.


Media Usage
Recent studies show that increased media usage can lead to
physical and psychological complaints (Bernath et al., 2020) and
has a negative impact on health-related quality of life (Finne
et al., 2013). In light of this, reducing screen time can lead to
better general and mental health (Colley et al., 2020). However,
although very high digital media usage times were the case for all
player categories, no relevant correlations with stress perception
and wellbeing could be observed in our study. One possible
reason might be the long durations of physical activity that might
partially balance the negative effects of screen time. Nevertheless,
further research is needed to confirm these results and get better



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 9 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



TABLE 10 | Multiple regression: lifestyle factors in relation to the WHO-5 scores.


Variables B SE Beta 95% CI (lower; Sig.
upper limit)


Total screentime 0.00 <0.01 −0.01 <-0.01; <0.01 0.79
(min/day)


Sleep on weekdays 0.86 0.37 0.08 0.13; 1.59 0.02
(hours)


Sleep on weekends −1.05 0.33 −0.11 −1.70; −0.41 <0.01
(hours)


Sitting time (hours/day) −0.43 0.15 −0.09 <0.01; −0.72 <0.01


Physical activity 0.09 0.05 0.06 −0.02; 0.18 0.10
(hours/week)


Times awake per night −0.69 0.23 −0.10 −1.15; −0.23 <0.01


Age (years) −0.12 0.10 −0.04 −0.32; 0.08 0.23


Gender (male = 1; −5.10 1,78 −0.09 −8.59; −1.61 <0.01
female = 2)

BMI (kg/m [2] ) −0.25 0.11 −0.08 −0.47; −0.04 0.02


Dependent variable: WHO-5 score, n = 915; p < 0.001, adjusted R [2] = 0.042.


TABLE 11 | Multiple regression: lifestyle factors in relation to the subjective health
status.


Variables B SE Wald 95% CI (lower; Sig.
upper limit)


Total screentime 0.00 0.00 1.93 1.00; 1.00 0.17
(min/day)


Sleep on weekdays 0.15 0.09 2.59 0.97; 1.39 0.11
(hours)


Sleep on weekends −0.13 0.08 2.37 0.75; 1.04 0.12
(hours)


Sitting time (hours/day) −0.09 0.04 5.83 0.86; 0.98 0.02


Physical activity 0.09 0.03 10.37 1.04; 1.16 <0.01
(hours/week)


Times awake per night −0.10 0.04 4.83 0.84; 0.99 0.03


Age (years) 0.5 0.03 2.70 0.99; 1.11 0.10


Gender (male = 1; −0.61 0.38 2.51 0.26; 1.15 0.11
female = 2)

BMI (kg/m [2] ) −0.11 0.02 25.08 0.86; 0.94 0.03


Dependent variable: dichotomized subjective health status (“good or better” = 1 vs. “bad
or worse” = 0), n = 949; p < 0.01, Nagelkerkes R [2] = 0.165.


insight into the possible interaction of the health behavior and
media usage in this target group.
Due to the recruitment and eligibility criteria of the present
study, gaming was logically the medium used the most by the
participants. Professional gamers spent most of their daily time
with gaming, especially eSports games. The particularly high
playing time of the professional eSports players is probably due
to the fact that gaming is their main source of income and, in this
context, they can devote more time to gaming. Moreover, their
career depends on their performance, which is why they have
to invest more time in training their skills. However, amateurs
also reported that they played for many hours a day; even regular
and occasional players still played for an average of more than
2–3 h a day. These high amounts of playing time must be viewed



critically. Generally, the excessive use of video games is associated
with poorer self-reported general health (Wenzel et al., 2009),
high energy intake (Lyons et al., 2012) and further negative effects
(Mentzoni et al., 2011). Even though these consequences could
not be observed in our study, the possible negative effects should
still not be ignored.
Additionally, high social media usage and messaging times
were apparent across all player categories. The professional
eSports players also had the highest usage times of these media.
Negative correlations between social media use and for example
depression or anxiety have already been proven (Barry et al.,
2017). However, the risk for mental health problems is especially
increased by a use of social media for more than 3 h per day
(Riehm et al., 2019), which none of the player groups reached
on average. The participants probably use this medium primarily
for networking and communicating with friends and the gaming
community, as the particularly high messaging times show. Many
players get to know each other online and live all over Germany,
which is why other means of networking such as social media
come in handy.
Similar to other studies, traditional media consumption such
as reading print media is low compared to online media (Beisch
et al., 2019; Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverbund Südwest,
2020). The only exception is television, which remains the most
used medium in the German population. However, new media
like online livestreams are on the rise and are already present in
young age groups. Especially in 2020, the online media recorded
an increase due to the COVID-19 pandemic (Lemenager et al.,
2020; Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverbund Südwest, 2020).
The target group investigated in the current study tends to use
more online media. Only a very small proportion consumed
television and print media. This is a point that could be relevant
to media campaigns that address, for example, health promotion
in this target group. These campaigns should possibly make use
of online media as well, as traditional media are no longer the
main focus of the young target group.


Wellbeing and Stress
In terms of wellbeing, the average score of the participants was
above 50, which is considered the cut-off for “questionable”
wellbeing (Topp et al., 2015). Hence, the wellbeing of the video
game and eSports players can be considered as good. They show
similar scores to amateur and professional athletes in traditional
sports (Spengler et al., 2013). These positive values go hand in
hand with the eSports players’ perception of stress. Most eSports
players experience low levels of stress. This is also to be found in
the average German population (Klein et al., 2016). It is certain
that the professional eSports players have many internal and
external stressors (Smith et al., 2019) and that so-called media
multitasking has an influence on the perceived stress (Reinecke
et al., 2017). It is also possible that the aspects of increased media
consumption, interaction with the community and therefore
the constant social availability of the eSports player have a
considerable influence on their stress perception. It is necessary
for future research to investigate further the influencing factors
of the perceived stress levels of eSports players.



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 10 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



Although regression coefficients were small, the results
indicate significant associations between BMI and sitting
time and subjective health status. Since physical activity can
counteract this potentially negative impact, it is recommended to
implement physical activity programs in the training of eSport
athletes. In conclusion, despite some areas showing room for
improvement, the eSports players reported a very positive general
health status. Accordingly, many outdated clichés about eSports
players seem to not be the case in our study.


Limitations
The present study also has some limitations. Due to the data
collection at live events, the respective game genres at display
during the events may be overrepresented in this sample. To
compensate for this, the questionnaire was distributed on various
online gaming websites. Nevertheless, about half of the sample
chose tactic shooters as their main genre, while market reports
indicate that this genre only makes up for about 20% percent of
games played (Entertainment Software Association, 2019).
Secondly, most of the topics were only addressed through a
small number of questions in order to provide data on a wide
range of different health behaviors. In light of this and due to
the cross-sectional design of the study, most of the topics were
introduced in a purely descriptive manner and no information
on causality can be provided. In terms of media usage, it must
also be taken into account that many of the media can be used
simultaneously, such as watching live streams and chatting via
messenger apps or listening to music while playing games (van
der Schuur et al., 2015). The questionnaire did not explicitly ask
for simultaneous use of media, but incorporating this in future
studies could provide a more detailed insight into the total screen
time of participants.
Thirdly, many participants were excluded from the study due
to missing answers in the BMI variables. The reason for this
omission was the decision to provide results on a well-described
sample of almost the same size in all calculations. Adding the
excluded records does not lead to significant change in the results,
so the decision to exclude individuals with missing BMI values
was retained.
Lastly, the present study is based exclusively on selfreported data. For this reason, the results can be affected by
social desirability or subjective over- and underestimation
of certain behaviors like sedentary times or physical activity
(Prince et al., 2008; Dowd et al., 2018). In order to minimize
these inconsistencies, paradoxical data were excluded and
data were checked for extreme values to prevent distortion
through erroneous information. However, effects of social
desirability and inaccurate reporting cannot generally
be excluded.


REFERENCES


Akçay, D., and Akçay, B. D. (2018). The influence of media on the sleep quality in
[adolescents. Turk. J Pediatr. 60, 255–263. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2018.03.004](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2018.03.004)
Âkerstedt, T. (2006). Psychosocial stress and impaired sleep. Scand. J. Work
[Environ. Health 32, 493–501. doi: 10.5271/sjweh.1054](https://doi.org/10.5271/sjweh.1054)
Bailey, D. P., Hewson, D. J., Champion, R. B., and Sayegh, S. M. (2019). Sitting
time and risk of cardiovascular disease and diabetes: a systematic review and



CONCLUSIONS


Overall, the video game and eSports players show sufficient
general health and have predominantly positive health behaviors.
Many aspects with the potential for further improvement, such
as sleep patterns and the moderate stress in professional players,
are also the case in the German general population. A closer
look should be taken at the high duration of media usage,
which could be increased as digitization progresses and thus
have further negative consequences on the players’ health. To
keep this young target group healthy, it is important that they
receive appropriate support. In this respect, it is necessary to
use online media to address this group in a target grouporiented manner.


DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT


The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.


ETHICS STATEMENT


The studies involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by the Ethical Committee of the German
Sport University Cologne approved the study (reference:
053/2018). Written informed consent from the participants’
legal guardian/next of kin was not required to participate in
this study in accordance with the national legislation and the
institutional requirements.


AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS


KR, IF, and CG: conceptualization. KR, MS, PB, CT, and KW:
data curation. KR and KW: formal analysis. IF and CG: funding
acquisition, project administration, and supervision. KR, MS,
PB, IF, CT, KW, and CG: investigation and writing—review and
editing. KR: methodology. IF: resources. KR, MS, PB, CT, KW,
and CG: validation. KR, MS, and IF: visualization. KR and MS:
writing—original draft. All authors contributed to the article and
approved the submitted version.


FUNDING


The present study is part of the esportwissen.de-project, which
was financially supported by the AOK Rhineland/Hamburg. The
funders had no influence on the design of the study; in the
collection, analyses or interpretation of data; in the writing of the
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.


meta-analysis. Am. J. Prev. Med. 57, 408–416. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2019.
04.015
Barry, C. T., Sidoti, C. L., Briggs, S. M., Reiter, S. R., and Lindsey, R. A.
(2017). Adolescent social media use and mental health from adolescent
and parent perspectives. J. Adolesc. 61, 1–11. doi: 10.1016/j.adolescence.2017.
08.005
Bastianon, C. D., Klein, E. M., Tibubos, A. N., Brähler, E., Beutel, M. E.,
and Petrowski, K. (2020). Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10) psychometric



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 11 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



properties in migrants and native Germans. BMC Psychiatry 20:450.
[doi: 10.1186/s12888-020-02851-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-020-02851-2)
Beckmann, K., Glemser, A., Heckel, C., Heyde, C., von der, HoffmeyerZlotnik, J., Hanefeld, U., et al. (2016). Demographische Standards. Eine
gemeinsame Empfehlung des ADM, Arbeitskreis Deutscher Markt- und
Sozialforschungsinstitute e.V., der Arbeitsgemeinschaft Sozialwissenschaftlicher
Institute e.V. (ASI) und des Statistischen Bundesamtes [Demographical
standards—A common recommendation of the ADM working group of German
Market. And Social Research Institutes, working group of Social Science Institutes
(ASI) and the German Federal Statistical Office]. Wiesbaden: Federal Statistical
Office of Germany.
Beisch, N., Koch, W., and Schäfer, C. (2019). ARD/ZDF-Onlinestudie 2019:
Mediale Internetnutzung und Video-on-Demand gewinnen weiter an
Bedeutung. Media Perspektiven 9, 37496-388.
Bernath, J., Suter, L., Waller, G., Willemse, I., Külling, C., and Süss, D.
(2020). JAMESfocus Medien und Gesundheit. Zürich: Zürcher Hochshcule für
Angewandte Wissenschaften.
Biswas, A., Oh, P. I., Faulkner, G. E., Bajaj, R. R., Silver, M. A., Mitchell, M. S.,
et al. (2015). Sedentary time and its association with risk for disease incidence,
mortality, and hospitalization in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
[Ann. Int. Med. 162, 123–132. doi: 10.7326/M14-1651](https://doi.org/10.7326/M14-1651)
Chau, J. Y., Grunseit, A. C., Chey, T., Stamatakis, E., Wendy, J. B., Charles, E. M.,
et al. (2013). Daily sitting time and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis. PLoS
[ONE 8:e80000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080000](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080000)
Clemes, S. A., Houdmont, J., Munir, F., Wilson, K., Kerr, R., and Addley,
K. (2016). Descriptive epidemiology of domain-specific sitting in working
adults: the Stormont Study. J. Public Health 38, 53–60. doi: 10.1093/pubmed/
fdu114
Cohen, S., Karnarck, T., and Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of perceived
[stress. J. Health Soc. Behav. 24, 386–396. doi: 10.2307/2136404](https://doi.org/10.2307/2136404)
Colley, R. C., Bushnik, T., and Langlois, K. (2020). Exercise and
screen time during the COVID-19 pandemic. Health Rep. 31, 3–11.
[doi: 10.25318/82-003-x202000600001-eng](https://doi.org/10.25318/82-003-x202000600001-eng)
DAK Gesundheit (2020). Mediensucht 2020 - Gaming und Social Media in Zeiten
von Corona: DAK-Längsschnittstudie: Befragung von Kindern, Jugendlichen
[(12-17 Jahre) und deren Eltern. Available online at: https://www.dak.de/dak/](https://www.dak.de/dak/download/report-2296314.pdf)
[download/report-2296314.pdf (accessed December 06, 2021).](https://www.dak.de/dak/download/report-2296314.pdf)
DiFrancisco-Donoghue, J., Balentine, J., Schmidt, G., and Zwibel, H.
(2019). Managing the health of the eSport athlete: an integrated
health management model. BMJ Open Sport Exerc. Med. 5:e000467.
[doi: 10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467)
Dowd, K. P., Szeklicki, R., Minetto, M. A., Murphy, M. H., Polito, A., Ghigo, E.,
et al. (2018). A systematic literature review of reviews on techniques for physical
activity measurement in adults: a DEDIPAC study. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act
[15, 1–33. doi: 10.1186/s12966-017-0636-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-017-0636-2)
Entertainment Software Association (2019). Essential Facts about the Computer
[and Video Game Industry. Available online at: http://www.theesa.com/](http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ESA_Essential_facts_2019_final.pdf)
[wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ESA_Essential_facts_2019_final.pdf](http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ESA_Essential_facts_2019_final.pdf) (accessed
January 20, 2021).
[esportwissen.de (2017). Esports meets Science. Available online at: https://www.](https://www.esportwissen.de/en/)
[esportwissen.de/en/ (accessed February 08, 2021).](https://www.esportwissen.de/en/)
Feld, M., and Young, P. (2017). Beurer Schlafatlas 2017: So schläft Deutschland. 1.
Auflage. München: Südwest.
Finger, J. D., Mensink, G., Lange, C., and Manz, K. (2017). Gesundheitsfördernde
körperliche Aktivität in der Freizeit bei Erwachsenen in Deutschland. J. Health
[Monit. 2, 37–44. doi: 10.17886/RKI-GBE-2017-027](https://doi.org/10.17886/RKI-GBE-2017-027)
Finne, E., Bucksch, J., Lampert, T., and Kolip, P. (2013). Physical activity
and screen-based media use: cross-sectional associations with health-related
quality of life and the role of body satisfaction in a representative
sample of German adolescents. Health Psychol. Behav. Med. 1, 15–30.
[doi: 10.1080/21642850.2013.809313](https://doi.org/10.1080/21642850.2013.809313)
Fortier-Brochu, E., Beaulieu-Bonneau, S., Ivers, H., and Morin, C. M.
(2010). Relations between sleep, fatigue, and health-related quality of
life in individuals with insomnia. J. Psychosomat. Res. 69, 475–483.
[doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2010.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2010.05.005)
Froböse, I., Biallas, B., and Wallmann-Sperlich, B. (2018). “DKV-Report 2018: Wie
gesund lebt Deutschland?” Düsseldorf: Deutsche Krankenversicherung.



Hale, L., and Guan, S. (2015). Screen time and sleep among school-aged children
and adolescents: a systematic literature review. Sleep Med. Rev. 21, 50–58.
[doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2014.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2014.07.007)
Hatori, M., Gronfier, C., van Gelder, R. N., Bernstein, P. S., Carreras, J., Panda,
S., et al. (2017). Global rise of potential health hazards caused by blue lightinduced circadian disruption in modern aging societies. NPJ Aging Mech. Dis.
[3:9. doi: 10.1038/s41514-017-0010-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41514-017-0010-2)
Hirshkowitz, M., Whiton, K., Albert, S. M., Alessi, C., Bruni, O.,
DonCarlos, L., et al. (2015). National Sleep Foundation’s updated
sleep duration recommendations: final report. Sleep Health 1:233–243.
[doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2015.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleh.2015.10.004)
Hoffman, B., and Nadelson, L. (2009). Motivational engagement and video
gaming: a mixed methods study. Educ. Technol. Res. Dev. 58, 245–270.
[doi: 10.1007/s11423-009-9134-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-009-9134-9)
Huard Pelletier, V., Lessard, A., Pich,é, F., Tétreau, C., and Descarreaux, M. (2020).
Video games and their associations with physical health: a scoping review. BMJ
[Open Sport Exerc. Med. 6:e000832. doi: 10.1136/bmjsem-2020-000832](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-2020-000832)
Kallus, K. W., and Kellmann, M. (2016). The Recovery-Stress Questionnaires.
Frankfurt am Main: Pearson Assessment & Information GmbH.
Klein, E. M., Brähler, E., Dreier, M., Reinecke, L., Müller, K. W., Schmutzer, G.,
et al. (2016). The German version of the Perceived Stress Scale - psychometric
characteristics in a representative German community sample. BMC Psychiatry
[16:159. doi: 10.1186/s12888-016-0875-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-016-0875-9)
Lemenager, T., Neissner, M., Koopmann, A., Reinhard, I., Georgiadou, E.,
Müller, A., et al. (2020). COVID-19 lockdown restrictions and online
media consumption in germany. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 18:14.
[doi: 10.3390/ijerph18010014](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18010014)
Lissak, G. (2018). Adverse physiological and psychological effects of screen time
on children and adolescents: literature review and case study. Environ. Res. 164,
[149–157. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2018.01.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.01.015)
Lock, A. M., Bonetti, D. L., and Campbell, A. D. K. (2018). The psychological
and physiological health effects of fatigue. Occup. Med. 68, 502–511.
[doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqy109](https://doi.org/10.1093/occmed/kqy109)
Lyons, E. J., Tate, D. F., Ward, D. S., and Wang, X. (2012). Energy intake
and expenditure during sedentary screen time and motion-controlled video
[gaming. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 96, 234–239. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.028423](https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.111.028423)
Medienpädagogischer Forschungsverbund Südwest (2020). JIM-Studie 2020:
[Jugend, Information, Medien. Available online at: https://www.mpfs.de/](https://www.mpfs.de/fileadmin/files/Studien/JIM/2020/JIM-Studie-2020_Web_final.pdf)
[fileadmin/files/Studien/JIM/2020/JIM-Studie-2020_Web_final.pdf](https://www.mpfs.de/fileadmin/files/Studien/JIM/2020/JIM-Studie-2020_Web_final.pdf) (accessed
January 08, 2021).
[Mental Health Services (n. d.). WHO-5-Questionnaires. Available online at: https://](https://www.psykiatri-regionh.dk/who-5/who-5-questionnaires/Pages/default.aspx)
[www.psykiatri-regionh.dk/who-5/who-5-questionnaires/Pages/default.aspx](https://www.psykiatri-regionh.dk/who-5/who-5-questionnaires/Pages/default.aspx)
(accessed December 06, 2021).
Mentzoni, R. A., Brunborg, G. S., Molde, H., Myrseth, H., Skouverøe, K. J. M.,
Hetland, J., et al. (2011). Problematic video game use: estimated prevalence and
associations with mental and physical health. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw.
[14, 591–596. doi: 10.1089/cyber.2010.0260](https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2010.0260)
Mireku, M. O., Barker, M. M., Mutz, J., Dumontheil, I., Thomas, M. S. C.,
Röösli, M., et al. (2019). Night-time screen-based media device use and
adolescents’ sleep and health-related quality of life. Environ. Int. 124, 66–78.
[doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.11.069](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2018.11.069)
Newzoo (2020a). 2020 Global Games Market Report: Free Version. Available
[online at: https://newzoo.com/insights/trend-reports/newzoo-global-esports-](https://newzoo.com/insights/trend-reports/newzoo-global-esports-market-report-2020-light-version/)
[market-report-2020-light-version/ (accessed February 08, 2021).](https://newzoo.com/insights/trend-reports/newzoo-global-esports-market-report-2020-light-version/)
Newzoo (2020b). Global Esports Audience Growth 2018–2023. Available online at:
[https://newzoo.com/key-numbers/ (accessed February 08, 2021).](https://newzoo.com/key-numbers/)
Patterson, R., McNamara, E., Tainio, M., Sá, T. H., de, Smith, A. D., Sharp, S. J., et al.
(2018). Sedentary behaviour and risk of all-cause, cardiovascular and cancer
mortality, and incident type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and dose response
[meta-analysis. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 33, 811–829. doi: 10.1007/s10654-018-0380-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-018-0380-1)
Prince, S. A., Adamo, K. B., Hamel, M. E., Hardt, J., Connor Gorber, S., and
Tremblay, M. (2008). A comparison of direct versus self-report measures for
assessing physical activity in adults: a systematic review. Int. J. Behav. Nutr.
[Phys. Act 5, 1–24. doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-5-56](https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-5-56)
Reid Chassiakos, Y. L., Radesky, J., Christakis, D., Moreno, M. A., Cross, C., and
Council on Communications and Media. (2016). Children and adolescents and
[digital media. Pediatrics. 135:e20162593. doi: 10.1542/peds.2016-2593](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-2593)



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 12 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


Rudolf et al. The eSports Study 2020



Reinecke, L., Aufenanger, S., Beutel, M. E., Dreier, M., Quiring, O., Stark, B.,
et al. (2017). Digital stress over the life span: the effects of communication
load and internet multitasking on perceived stress and psychological health
impairments in a german probability sample. Media Psychol. 20, 90–115.
[doi: 10.1080/15213269.2015.1121832](https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2015.1121832)
Rezende, L., Sá, T. H., Mielke, G. I., Viscondi, J., Rey-López, J. P., and
Garcia, L. M. T. (2016). All-cause mortality attributable to sitting time:
analysis of 54 countries worldwide. Am. J. Prev. Med. 51, 253–263.
[doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2016.01.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2016.01.022)
Riehm, K. E., Feder, K. A., Tormohlen, K. N., Crum, R. M., Young, A. S., Green,
K. M., et al. (2019). Associations between time spent using social media and
internalizing and externalizing problems among US youth. JAMA Psychiatry
[76, 1266–1273. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.2325](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.2325)
Rudolf, K., Bickmann, P., Froböse, I., Tholl, C., Wechsler, K., and Grieben, C.
(2020). Demographics and health behavior of video game and eSports players
in Germany: The eSports Study 2019. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17:1870.
[doi: 10.3390/ijerph17061870](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17061870)
Russoniello, C. V., O’Brien, K., and Parks, J. M. (2009). The effectiveness of casual
video games in improving mood and decreasing stress. J. Cyber Ther. Rehabil.
2, 53–66.
Smith, M. J., Birch, P. D., and Bright, D. (2019). Identifying stressors and coping
strategies of elite esports competitors. Int. J. Gaming Comp. Mediat. Simulat.
[11, 22–39. doi: 10.4018/IJGCMS.2019040102](https://doi.org/10.4018/IJGCMS.2019040102)
Spengler, A., Schneider, G., and Schröder, E. P. (2013). Depressivität – Screening
und Vorkommen in der sportmedizinischen Praxis. Dtsch. Z. Sportmed. 2013,
[65–68. doi: 10.5960/dzsm.2012.045](https://doi.org/10.5960/dzsm.2012.045)
Statistisches Bundesamt (2017). Mikrozensus - Fragen zur Gesundheit:
[Körpermaße der Bevölkerung. Available online at: https://www.destatis.de/DE/](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Gesundheit/Gesundheitszustand-Relevantes-Verhalten/Publikationen/Downloads-Gesundheitszustand/koerpermasse-5239003179004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile)
[Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Gesundheit/Gesundheitszustand-Relevantes-](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Gesundheit/Gesundheitszustand-Relevantes-Verhalten/Publikationen/Downloads-Gesundheitszustand/koerpermasse-5239003179004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile)
[Verhalten/Publikationen/Downloads-Gesundheitszustand/koerpermasse-](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Gesundheit/Gesundheitszustand-Relevantes-Verhalten/Publikationen/Downloads-Gesundheitszustand/koerpermasse-5239003179004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile)
[5239003179004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile (accessed December 06, 2021).](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Gesundheit/Gesundheitszustand-Relevantes-Verhalten/Publikationen/Downloads-Gesundheitszustand/koerpermasse-5239003179004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile)
Topp, C. W., Østergaard, S. D., Søndergaard, S., and Bech, P. (2015). The WHO-5
well-being index: a systematic review of the literature. Psychother. Psychosomat.
[84, 167–176. doi: 10.1159/000376585](https://doi.org/10.1159/000376585)
Twenge, J. M., and Campbell, W. K. (2018). Associations between screen
time and lower psychological well-being among children and adolescents:
evidence from a population-based study. Prev. Med. Rep. 271–283.
[doi: 10.1016/j.pmedr.2018.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmedr.2018.10.003)



van der Schuur, W. A., Baumgartner, S. E., Sumter, S. R., and Valkenburg,
P. M. (2015). The consequences of media multitasking for youth:
a review. Comp. Hum. Behav. 53, 204–215. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.
06.035
Wenzel, H. G., Bakken, I. J., Johansson, A., Götestam, K. G., and Øren, A. (2009).
Excessive computer game playing among norwegian adults: self-reported
consequences of playing and association with mental health problems. Psychol.
[Rep. 105, 1237–1247. doi: 10.2466/PR0.105.F.1237-1247](https://doi.org/10.2466/PR0.105.F.1237-1247)
WHO (1998). Wellbeing Measures in Primary Health Care/The Depcare Project.
Copenhagen.
World Health Organization (2010). Global Recommendations on Physical Activity
[for Health. Available online at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241599979)
[9789241599979 (accessed December 06, 2021).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241599979)
World Health Organization (2020). ICD-11 for Mortality and Morbidity Statistics.
[Available online at: https://icd.who.int/browse11/l-m/en#/http://id.who.int/](https://icd.who.int/browse11/l-m/en#/http://id.who.int/icd/entity/1448597234)
[icd/entity/1448597234 (accessed December 06, 2021).](https://icd.who.int/browse11/l-m/en#/http://id.who.int/icd/entity/1448597234)
Yang, Y., Shin, J. C., Li, D., and An, R. (2017). Sedentary behavior and sleep
problems: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Behav. Med. 24,
[481–492. doi: 10.1007/s12529-016-9609-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12529-016-9609-0)


**Conflict of Interest:** The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.


**Publisher’s Note:** All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.


Copyright © 2022 Rudolf, Soffner, Bickmann, Froböse, Tholl, Wechsler and Grieben.
[This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.



[Frontiers in Sports and Active Living | www.frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living) 13 [February 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 665604](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sports-and-active-living#articles)


