**Open access** **Original article**
# **Managing the health of the eSport** **athlete: an integrated health** **management model**


Joanne DiFrancisco-Donoghue, [1,2] Jerry Balentine, [3] Gordon Schmidt, [4]
Hallie Zwibel [2,5]



**To cite:**
DiFrancisco-Donoghue J,
Balentine J, Schmidt G,
_et al_ . Managing the health
of the eSport athlete: an
integrated health management
model. _BMJ Open Sport_
_& Exercise Medicine_
2019; **5** :e000467. doi:10.1136/
bmjsem-2018-000467


Accepted 18 December 2018


© Author(s) (or their
employer(s)) 2019. Re-use
permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights
and permissions. Published by
BMJ.

1Department of Osteopathic
Medicine, New York Institute
of Technology College of
Osteopathic Medicine (NYITCOM), New York City, New York,
USA
2Center for Sports Medicine
NYIT-COM, New York City, New
York, USA
3Office of the Vice President
NYIT-COM, New York City, New
York, USA
4Office of the Dean NYIT-School
of Health Professions, New York
City, New York, USA
5Department of Family Medicine,
NYIT-COM, New York City, New
York, USA


**Correspondence to**
Dr Joanne DiFranciscoDonoghue; ​jdonoghu@​nyit.​edu



**Abstract**
**Objectives** eSport is a form of electronic gaming, also
known as professional or competitive video gaming, and
is growing at a rapid pace worldwide. Over 50 US colleges
have established varsity gaming teams over the past three
years; some colleges offer eSport scholarships as they do
for traditional sports. There is little objective research on
the health habits of these players who are often placed
under the direction of the athletics department on college
campuses, and there is currently no health management
model on how to treat these new athletes.
**Methods** Anonymous electronic surveys were sent to
65 collegiate eSport players from nine universities across
the USA and Canada inquiring about gaming and lifestyle
habits, and musculoskeletal complaints due to eSport
competition.
**Results** Players practiced between 3 and 10 hours per
day. The most frequently reported complaint was eye
fatigue (56%), followed by neck and back pain (42%).
eSport athletes reported wrist pain (36%) and hand pain
(32%). Forty per cent of participants do not participate in
any form of physical exercise. Among the players surveyed,
only 2% had sought medical attention.
**Conclusion** eSport players, just like athletes in
traditional sports, are susceptible to overuse injuries. The
most common complaint was eye fatigue, followed by neck
and back pain. This study shows eSport athletes are also
prone to wrist and hand pain. This paper proposes a health
management model that offers a comprehensive medical
team approach to prevent and treat eSport athletes.


**Introduction**
Hundreds of millions of players are engaged
daily in virtual and competitive electronic
gaming—eSport. [1] Whether it is playing these
games or just being a fan, eSports enthusiasts have proliferated throughout the world.
According to Newzoo, a market tracking
company, 427 million people will be watching
eSports by 2019 and will reach a global audience of 1.1 billion by 2021. [1] Player earnings
from sponsorships and prizes exceed $1.5
billion. [2] In recent months, competitive
gaming (eSport) has received a large amount
of social media and public attention. Ninety
per cent of children in the USA play electronic



**What are the new findings?**


 - - eSport has grown rapidly on a collegiate level, and
currently >50 colleges in the USA have competitive
teams.

 - - Forty per cent did not participate in any form of
physical activity.

 - - The time sitting in front of a computer for a collegiate
eSport player ranges from 5.5 to 10 hours daily.

 - - The most common ailment from eSport players was
eye fatigue, followed by neck, back, wrist and hand
pain.


**How might it impact on clinical practice in the**
**near future?**


 - - We call for clinical practice guidelines for eSport
players.

 - - We recommend sports physicians and other health
professionals better understand the medical needs
of these athletes; eSports should be included in the
clinical sports medicine curriculum.


video games on a regular basis. [3] The IOC on
28 October 2017 in Lausanne, Switzerland,
has accepted that eSport is a sporting activity. [4]
Viewership is so high for certain games (such
as League of Legends) that it has bypassed the
Major League World series. [5 6] These competitions are aired on YouTube or on streaming
sites. The most widely known is ‘​Twitch.​com’
which accounts for >40% of eSport streaming
volume. Twitch was purchased by Amazon in
2014 for $970 million.
Colleges, universities, and high schools
are adding eSport teams at a rapid pace. It
is appealing for a school because it attracts
a different type of student than the prototypical athlete image. In South Korea,
universities classify eSport competitors as
traditional athletes. [7] In the US, over 50
colleges have varsity eSport teams under the
National Association of Collegiate eSports
(NACE). [8] Twenty-two colleges in the US
currently offer scholarships for gaming.



DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, _et al_ . _BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med_ 2019; **5** :e000467. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467 **1**


**Open access**


High schools across the United States have launched a
competitive varsity season in the fall of 2018. [9] Undergraduate programme have been created and offered in
the industry of eSport. The NCAA is currently investigating eSport as a recognised sport. In 2018, the National
Basketball Association developed NBA’s 2K League. This
consists of a group of 17 franchises affiliated with NBA
teams that play electronic basketball. This league gets
aired on ESPN’s sport channel and has drafts similar to
professional basketball.
There is, however, little known about the physical
and mental health demands and injury management of
eSport players. This new sport requires the support of
health professionals who understand social or addictive
behaviours, changes in academic or work performance,
and chronic eSport participatory injuries such as wrist or
hand problems, eye strain and postural assessments.
Our aim was to report the common health issues that
occur in competitive gaming and outline a healthcare
model for institutions to help create protocols to prevent
and treat common health concerns in eSport athletes.


**A changing role for coaches and healthcare practitioners in**
**sports medicine and rehabilitation**
eSport has received much controversy from critics as a
traditional sport due to its lack of physicality. Regardless
of this debate, the eSport team are the ‘new athletes’ on
campus and they should be held to the same standards
of other athletes. These teams have uniforms, coaches;
they practice together and compete regularly. However,
they do not have the sport administration behind them
of traditional sports teams. When we think of an eSport
player, we do not typically think of a physician’s clearance
to participate in a sedentary activity with little chance
of injury. Quite contrary to that belief, these athletes
suffer health concerns and chronic overuse injuries. [10]
It is common for professional eSport athletes to suffer
career-ending injuries. The most common injury is wrist
and hand injuries. [10] Alarmingly, in 2013 pro StarCraft 2
Player Geoff ‘Incontrol’ Robinson suffered from a blood
clot in his knee. This clot is also called a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) which is common when individuals sit for
long periods of time. [10 11] If ignored, DVT can travel to
the lungs and cause a pulmonary embolism which is life
threatening. [11] The common concerns and injuries that
are seen in eSport athletes are not the typical injuries
seen in traditional student athletes and many health
professionals and trainers may not know what type of
injuries to look for.
eSport athletes at a collegiate level have talents that
exceed the skills of the average recreational virtual
gaming players. The manual dexterity that is needed to
perform the actions required to compete has a direct
impact on the athlete’s performance. [12] These games
require thinking skills and reaction times faster than their
competitor. [12] Whereas novice players average approximately 50 action moves per minute, higher level athletes



make 10 moves per second or 500–600 action moves per
minute. [13]

In order to succeed at gaming on a competitive level,
athletes are required to play for many hours a day. College
and school teams can practice together for 3–4 hours a
day, with many of them going home to continue practising their game. In many cases, they practice in a less
than ideal environment with improper posture, lighting
and time awareness.
eSport requires players to have their eyes fixed on a
computer screen with excessive exposure to light-emitting
diodes (LEDs). LEDs are used to provide illumination in
computers, smartphones, tablets and televisions. LEDs
have a broad spectrum of light. They appear white, but
these LEDs have a peak emission in the blue light range of
(400–490 nm). [14] Recent research has demonstrated that
excessive exposure to this blue-light spectrum can create
retinal and photoreceptor damage. [14 15] Excessive exposure can also impact the natural circadian rhythm. [14 15]
Melatonin is a hormone synthesised in our bodies. It is
an important marker of the natural circadian clock. Typically, melatonin is lowest during awake hours during the
day and then rises at night before sleep. Excessive exposure to LED lights, seen in computer screens, can alter
melatonin levels. [16] Players often need to take breaks to
refocus their eyes.
There are very little data on lifestyle habits and common
complaints from eSport players.
This paper presents results of a survey that characterise
lifestyle habits of collegiate eSport players and a proposed
healthcare model for eSport athletes.


**Methods**
Sixty-five collegiate varsity eSport players between the
ages of 18–22 years were surveyed from eight different
universities in the USA. Data were collected using an
anonymous, self-reported electronic questionnaire.
These players were from various geographic areas that
included the Northeast, the West coast, the South East
and the Midwest. The data highlight important lifestyle
behaviours and the importance of establishing appropriate services to manage eSport player’s health. This
questionnaire was developed by a collaborative effort
of the eSport players on the New York Institute of Technology campus based on common injuries they have
encountered in the past.


**Results**
Findings indicate that the average eSport player practices
between 5.5 and up to 10 hours a day prior to competitions. Figure 1 depicts four medical conditions associated
with these eSport players. Fifteen per cent reported 3
hours or more of sitting and playing without standing
to take a break. Forty per cent of the players reported
they do not participate in any kind of physical activity.
The largest complaint reported was eye fatigue, back and
neck pain was the second largest complaint, followed by
wrist and hand pain. The injuries seen in eSport athletes



**2** DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, _et al_ . _BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med_ 2019; **5** :e000467. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467


**Figure 1** Reported pain from eSport players surveyed.


are similar to injuries seen in sedentary office personnel,
as opposed to complaints commonly seen by sports medicine specialists. [17] Of the athletes surveyed who suffered
from an ailment, only 2% sought medical attention.


**Discussion**
The injuries seen in eSports are similar to conditions seen
in sedentary desk jobs with the incorporation of intense
dexterous actions. Exercise deficit disorder is a term used
to describe reduced levels of physical activity that are
not compliant with current public health recommendations. [18] It has been proposed that physicians diagnose <60
min a day of physical activity in youth as ‘Exercise-Deficit
Disorder’. [19] The current survey demonstrated that >40%
of these players have <60 min of activity a day. Although
a player might fulfil the recommended exercise requirements by American College of Sports Medicine or the
Center of Disease Control, sitting for prolonged periods
of time using small muscle groups will eventually result in
an injury. The psychosocial components seen in eSport
can include addictive behaviour, personal hygiene issues,
social anxiety and sleep disturbances. It is associated with
mental and health disorders as well. In 2018, WHO has
included gaming in its 11th Revision of the International
Classification of Diseases stating that gaming disorder
is ‘characterized by impaired control over gaming,
increasing priority given to gaming over other activities
to the extent that gaming takes precedence over other
interests and daily activities, and continuation or escalation of gaming despite the occurrence of negative
consequences’. [20]

Sports medicine for athletes who play contact sports
or who require physical training is challenging. Most
collegiate athletes have specific training programmes
targeting their sport. These plans include exercise to



**Open access**


prevent injuries, improve health and performance. When
an athlete suffers an injury, there are protocols in place
to evaluate, treat and guidelines on return to play. Many
of these decisions are from several health professionals,
and communication between these disciplines is essential. This structure can affect a team, and it can also affect
the long-term health of a player.


**Integrating health professionals for the eSport athlete**
Working with any sport team at any level requires a relationship with the players and the coach. A plan of services
should include baseline testing, clinical evaluations and
services as well as physical and mental health assessments.
This can help with academic performance and social
behaviours and should be presented in a way that does
not bombard the players with too many evaluations or
tests but offers a time frame and an explanation of how
these tests can benefit them.
The health management team of eSport players faces
a great deal of health-related challenges. The current
NYIT eSport model follows the traditional medical model
whereby the physician (usually a sport physician) is the
primary contact and ‘gatekeeper’. However, the first
point of contact with a healthcare professional may also
be a physical therapist, team doctor, general practitioner,
sports physician or psychologist. This model is based on
each individual discipline operating in its own specialty
with effective communication to each team member. The
team has two focuses: integrating health management
and understanding the demands needed to improve
eSport skills.
Traditionally, the head coach has the performance
expertise to manage performance, game plan and
sport-specific strength and conditioning goals. In this
specific model, there is a balance of the eSport coach
to help health professionals understand the minimal
training required to compete at the expected level of each
player. In this alternative model, the health professionals
will have to find a delicate balance of incorporating expertise in physical and mental well-being interspersed in this
training protocol. The following section introduces a
structured medical team model for a varsity eSport team
that can balance health management while optimising
gaming performance. This unique model requires the
communication and trust of each of these disciplines
with the head coach.


**Challenge**
eSport has not yet been recognised by the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) on college campuses,
therefore they are not required to have physical clearance
to participate, unlike other traditional NCAA athletes.
They also do not require a ‘return to play’ clearance if an
injury arises. This now empowers the coach, trainers and
athletic directors as the individuals who may recognise
the need to refer to health professionals. This proposed
model focuses on colleges and high schools requiring
eSport players who compete competitively on a varsity



DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, _et al_ . _BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med_ 2019; **5** :e000467. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467 **3**


**Open access**


level should be required to have a physical examination
to clear them for play.


**The proposed health model focuses on health and injury**
**prevention**
Coaches of eSport teams should have a working knowledge of minimal health guidelines and signs of common
overuse injuries as well as signs of gaming addiction. Physicians who screen these players should have a working
knowledge of what gaming entails, the specific demands
of the game or event as well as physical and emotional
demands of the players.
The goal should be to have each player at least fulfil
healthy lifestyle compliance with public health guidelines.


**Coach refers players to physical clearance**

- - The head coach is the senior individual who trains the
team and oversees, manages practices and provides
game-specific training for the team.


**Typical evaluation of an athlete**
The model of eSport physical assessment is vastly different
from the typical athlete evaluation model. Assessment
should be designed to focus on all domains associated
with this activity. There is no standardised assessment,
and this evaluation is structured based on preliminary
data:


**Figure 2** eSport health team model.




- - Sport physical—performed by the primary care sports
medicine physician.

–– Additional questions beyond the traditional sport
physical examination.
–– Ask focused questions regarding physical activity
and nutrition.
–– Evaluate social behaviour.
–– Evaluate addictive behaviours.
–– Inquire about academic performance.
–– Inquire about musculoskeletal complaints.
–– Evaluate vision.


**Assessment results and recommendations**
The primary care physician is the gatekeeper to recommend targeted treatment to the player and to the
interdisciplinary team. Feedback on treatment and
results should be provided back to the primary care
doctor of this team as well as the coach.
The primary care physician’s role is vital in assessing,
identifying players’ needs and referring the player to the
right specialist for additional assessment and treatment.
See figure 2 for the eSport team model, and table 1 for
each professional’s role in this model.


**Conclusions**
Overall, eSport players face challenges to master their
gaming while addressing adverse repercussions on their
health. Currently, the NCAA does not recognise eSport



**4** DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, _et al_ . _BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med_ 2019; **5** :e000467. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467


**Open access**









as a sanctioned sport therefore there are no management protocols for health or injury required for these
teams yet. If a health professional finds a concern, it will
be that individual’s professional decision on return to
play for these athletes. Being in good academic standing
and managing injuries is the responsibility of individual
institutions, players, coaches and trainers who interact
with these players regularly. These players should be
mandated by academic institutions and athletic departments to undergo a health evaluation annually to help
prevent injury and to be screened for medical issues,
similar to other traditional collegiate and high school
sports.


**Special considerations, obstacles and advice**

- - Coaches, athletic trainers and health professionals
may be sceptical of acknowledging and acceptance
of the new college ‘athlete’. Be prepared for some
distrust and resistance.

- - Be prepared for resistance from eSport players. This
is not a team that is usually required to do any physical activity and their days are usually spent gaming or
doing school work. Scheduling times for evaluations
may be difficult.

- - Athletes may not report any conditions or lack of
activity in order to minimise time away from gaming.

- - Trust might be an issue with some teams. They are not
used to the structure of medical teams. Most eSport



players do not have an off season. Helping them
understand that what you do is beneficial to them
and may not improve their performance. Motivation
might be difficult.


**Acknowledgements** The authors thank the NYIT eSport team for their
contribution and insight in the development of the eSport questionnaire.



**Contributors** JDD planned and executed the study and was the primary writer
and submitted the study. JB planned the study and assisted in editing the
manuscript. GS helped plan the study, assisted in statistical analysis and editing
the manuscript. HZ planned and executed the study with contributions to writing
and editing.

**Funding** The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.



**Disclaimer** The results of this study are presented clearly, honestly, and without
fabrication, falsification, or inappropriate data manipulation.

**Competing interests** None declared.

**Patient consent for publication** Not required.

**Provenance and peer review** Not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.

**Open access** This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the
[use is non-commercial. See: http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by-​nc/​4.​0/.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)


**References**
1. Buijsman M, 2018. Rainbow six: siege esports hours on twitch
[quadrupled compared to last year. Available from: https://​newzoo.​](https://newzoo.com/insights/articles/rainbow-six-siege-esports-hours-on-twitch-quadrupled-compared-to-last-year/)



DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, _et al_ . _BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med_ 2019; **5** :e000467. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467 **5**


**Open access**


[com/​insights/​articles/​rainbow-​six-​siege-​esports-​hours-​on-​twitch-​](https://newzoo.com/insights/articles/rainbow-six-siege-esports-hours-on-twitch-quadrupled-compared-to-last-year/)
[quadrupled-​compared-​to-​last-​year/ [Accessed 13 Nov 2018].](https://newzoo.com/insights/articles/rainbow-six-siege-esports-hours-on-twitch-quadrupled-compared-to-last-year/)
2. Schwartz N, 2014. More people watch eSports than watch the World
[Series or NBA Finals. Available from: https://​ftw.​usatoday.​com/​2014/​](https://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/05/league-of-legends-popularity-world-series-nba)
[05/​league-​of-​legends-​popularity-​world-​series-​nba [Accessed 17 Sep](https://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/05/league-of-legends-popularity-world-series-nba)
2018].
3. Hester B, 2016. Teens spend 25 times more of their time playing
[video games than going to the movies. Available from: http://www.​](http://www.ign.com/articles/2016/12/21/teens-spend-25-times-more-of-their-time-playing-video-games-than-going-to-the-movies)
[ign.​com/​articles/​2016/​12/​21/​teens-​spend-​25-​times-​more-​of-​their-​](http://www.ign.com/articles/2016/12/21/teens-spend-25-times-more-of-their-time-playing-video-games-than-going-to-the-movies)
[time-​playing-​video-​games-​than-​going-​to-​the-​movies [Accessed 17](http://www.ign.com/articles/2016/12/21/teens-spend-25-times-more-of-their-time-playing-video-games-than-going-to-the-movies)
Sep 2018].
4. Townley S, Townley A, 2018. eSport: everything to play for. Available
[from: http://www.​wipo.​int/​wipo_​magazine/​en/​2018/​01/​article_​0004.​](http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2018/01/article_0004.html)
[html [Accessed 17 Sep 2018].](http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2018/01/article_0004.html)
5. Kane D, Spradley BD. _Recognizing ESports as a Sport: United States_
_Sports Academy_ . 19, 2017.
6. Talks TEDx, Melcher K, 2016. Gamers: the rising stars of collegiate
[athletics. Available from: https://www.​youtube.​com/​watch?​v=​](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcX11m1g3hs)
[kcX11m1g3hs [Accessed 18 Sep 2018].](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kcX11m1g3hs)
7. Sorokanich B, 2014. South korean university now accepts gamers
[as student athletes. Available from: https://​gizmodo.​com/​south-​](https://gizmodo.com/south-korean-university-now-accepts-gamers-as-student-a-1547111361)
[korean-​university-​now-​accepts-​gamers-​as-​student-​a-​1547111361](https://gizmodo.com/south-korean-university-now-accepts-gamers-as-student-a-1547111361)

[Accessed 17 Sep 2018].
8. AACRAO, 2018. Video gaming: the newest College sport. Available:
[https://www.​aacrao.​org/​resources/​newsletters-​blogs/​aacrao-​](https://www.aacrao.org/resources/newsletters-blogs/aacrao-connect/article/video-gaming-the-newest-college-sport)
[connect/​article/​video-​gaming-​the-​newest-​college-​sport [Accessed](https://www.aacrao.org/resources/newsletters-blogs/aacrao-connect/article/video-gaming-the-newest-college-sport)
19 Sep 2018].
9. Fogek S, 2018. High School Esports Competitions to Begin in U.S.
[Available from: https://​variety.​com/​2018/​gaming/​news/​high-​school-​](https://variety.com/2018/gaming/news/high-school-esports-1202758438/)
[esports-​1202758438/ [Accessed 18 Sep 2018].](https://variety.com/2018/gaming/news/high-school-esports-1202758438/)



10. Brautigam T, 2016. Esports needs to face its injury problem.
[Available from: https://​esportsobserver.​com/​esports-​needs-​face-​](https://esportsobserver.com/esports-needs-face-injury-problem/)
[injury-​problem/ [Accessed 18 Sep 2018].](https://esportsobserver.com/esports-needs-face-injury-problem/)
11. Thachil J. Deep vein thrombosis. _[Hematology](http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/1024533214Z.000000000284)_ 2014;19:309–10.
12. Lewis JM, Trinh P, Kirsh D. A corpus analysis of strategy video
game play in Starcraft: Brood War. _Proceedings of the 33rd annual_
_conference of the cognitive science society_, 2011.
13. Lejacq Y, 2014. How fast is fast? Some gamers make 10 moves per
[second. Available from: https://www.​nbcnews.​com/​technolog/​how-​](https://www.nbcnews.com/technolog/how-fast-fast-some-pro-gamers-make-10-moves-second-8C11422946)
[fast-​fast-​some-​pro-​gamers-​make-​10-​moves-​second-​8C11422946](https://www.nbcnews.com/technolog/how-fast-fast-some-pro-gamers-make-10-moves-second-8C11422946)

[Accessed 18 Sep 2018].
14. Tosini G, Ferguson I, Tsubota K. Effects of blue light on the circadian
system and eye physiology. _[Mol Vis](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26900325)_ 2016;22:61–72.
15. van der Lely S, Frey S, Garbazza C, _et al_ . Blue blocker glasses
as a countermeasure for alerting effects of evening light-emitting
diode screen exposure in male teenagers. _[J Adolesc Health](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2014.08.002)_
2015;56:113–9.
16. Burgess HJ, Fogg LF. Individual differences in the amount and timing
of salivary melatonin secretion. _[PLoS One](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0003055)_ 2008;3:e3055.
17. Worsley PR, Rebolledo D, Webb S, _et al_ . Monitoring the
biomechanical and physiological effects of postural changes during
leisure chair sitting. _[J Tissue Viability](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtv.2017.10.001)_ 2018;27:16–22.
18. Faigenbaum AD, Chu DA, Paterno MV, _et al_ . Responding to
exercise-deficit disorder in youth: integrating wellness care into
pediatric physical therapy. _Pediatr Phys Ther_ 2013;25:2–6.
19. Walker G, Faigenbaum AD, Avery D. Physical inactivity in youth:
can exercise deficit disorder alter the way we view preventive care?
_ACSMs Health Fit J_ 2018;22:42.
[20. WHO, 2018. Gaming disorder. Available from: http://www.​who.​int/​](http://www.who.int/features/qa/gaming-disorder/en/)

[features/​qa/​gaming-​disorder/​en/ [Accessed 18 Sep 2018].](http://www.who.int/features/qa/gaming-disorder/en/)



**6** DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, _et al_ . _BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med_ 2019; **5** :e000467. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467


