Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-022-05614-0

## **RESEARCH**


## **Open Access**


# Musculoskeletal disorders in video gamers – a systematic review

Chuck Tholl [1*], Peter Bickmann [1], Konstantin Wechsler [2], Ingo Froböse [1] and Christopher Grieben [3]


**Abstract**
**Background:** Video gaming is a recreational activity with yearly increasing popularity. It is mostly a sedentary
behavior combined with repetitive movements of the upper limbs. If performed excessively, these movements may
promote strain injuries and a sedentary lifestyle is one of the contributing factors to musculoskeletal disorders. Therefore, a systematic review was conducted to evaluate if video gaming negatively affects the musculoskeletal system of
video gamers.
**Methods:** PubMed, Web of Science and The Cochrane Library were systematically searched in order to identify
relevant peer reviewed original articles in English published between 2000 and 2021. The Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) method was used for the analysis. Studies were included when
they contained investigations of changes of the musculoskeletal system due to video gaming in healthy individuals.
Studies with participants older than 60 years or solely psychological, social or cardiovascular outcomes were excluded.
An adapted version of the Newcastle–Ottawa Scale was used for the risk of bias analysis.
**Results:** Sixteen observational studies involving a total of 62,987 participants met the inclusion criteria. A majority
(11) of the studies reported statistical negative musculoskeletal changes due to video game playtime. Four studies did
not report changes and one study found no effect of video game playtime on the musculoskeletal system. Out of the
eleven studies, which demonstrated a negative impact of video game playtime on the musculoskeletal system, the
most reported painful body parts were the neck ( _n_ = 4), shoulder ( _n_ = 4) and back ( _n_ = 3). Ten studies reported odds
ratios (OR) for the dependence of the appearance of musculoskeletal disorders on video game playtime. In eight studies OR were significantly increased (1.3—5.2).
**Conclusion:** Eleven out of twelve studies demonstrated a negative impact of video game playtime on the musculoskeletal system. In particular, excessive video game playtimes (> 3 h/day) seemed to be a predictor for the appearance
of musculoskeletal disorders. Due to their great popularity across multiple generations, specific and tailored prevention and health promotion programs for video gamers need to be developed to counteract this important public
health issue.
**Keywords:** Video gaming, MSD, Sedentary behavior, Physical pain, Esports



*Correspondence: c.tholl@dshs-koeln.de

1 Institute of Movement Therapy and Movement‑oriented Prevention
and Rehabilitation, German Sport University Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article



**Introduction**
Video gaming is one of the most popular recreational
activities in the world [1]. In 2021 there were approximately 3.24 billion video gamers across the globe [2].
Alone Asia had 1.48 billion video gamers followed by
Europe with a gaming audience of 715 million [2]. For
the past several years the global video gaming industry has been growing. This has resulted in a global



© The Author(s) 2022. **Open Access** This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
[licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://​creat​iveco​](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[mmons.​org/​publi​cdoma​in/​zero/1.​0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 2 of 16



market amount close to USD 176 billion in 2021 [3]. This
is almost twice as much as the market size of the global
fitness and health club industry in 2019 [4], which is also
a big part of the leisure activity sector. Therefore, video
gaming cannot be seen as a short-term trend. However,
it is important to keep in mind that especially the video
gaming industry was one winner of the worldwide corona
pandemic [5], because video gaming was not restricted
by it. On the contrary, a lot of people had more leisure
time and they spent their free time on video gaming in
the corona lockdowns around the globe [5, 6], which was
a perfect basis for an accumulation of sedentary time.
Video gaming is a screen-based activity, comparable to watching TV, working at the computer or using a
smartphone. These kinds of activities are characterized
by long, continuous sitting periods and physical inactivity [7]. Such sedentary behaviors are well-known risks
of all-cause mortality and non-communicable diseases
(NCD) [8, 9]. Watching TV is probably the most motionless undertaking of the screen-based activities, because
it typically occurs in the evening time after dinner and a
day of work [10]. Therefore, it is a kind of relaxing activity for most people [11]. Working at a computer, e.g.,
in the office on the other hand, often involves different
kinds of sitting or standing positions, which are occasionally interrupted with short walks [12]. In addition to
this seated position, video gaming requires fine motor
skills to execute the gaming process [13, 14]. Therefore, it
involves repetitive movement of the arms, wrists, hands
and fingers in order to interact in the virtual environment

[15], similar to some types of office work or even more
intense activities [16]. Such movements, when performed
continuously and without interruption, can lead to musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs), especially of the upper
limbs [17, 18]. Moreover, MSDs are associated with physical inactivity, prolonged sitting and unilateral (sitting-)
postures [19].
MSDs are a huge financial burden for healthcare systems in European countries. In 2016 Germany reported
a loss of gross value added of EUR 30.4 billion because
of musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders [20].
This represents 1.0% of Germany’s gross domestic product (GDP). The Swedish public health care reported
approximately 20–30% of all visits were caused by MSDs
and in France annual costs borne by enterprises exceed
EUR 1 billion per year through MSDs [20]. Thus, in
order to reduce health care costs and increase productivity, all countries should be interested in reducing the
prevalence of MSDs. The generic term musculoskeletal
disease includes several different kinds of conditions and
diseases which affect bones, joints, muscles, and connective tissues [21]. For this reason, there is not only one but
a variety of definitions of MSDs. Due to this diversity of



definitions and thus a wide range of included diseases, the
evaluation of MSDs lacks in a gold standard approach.
Therefore, many different evaluation methods have been
used. The most common ones are subjective (non-)standardized questionnaires, which are used to evaluate pain
or discomforts in a defined time period [22]. Alternatively, (objective) clinical tests such the Finkelstein’s test

[23], have been used to evaluate single musculoskeletal
issues. Thus, a wide variety of diseases and injuries have
been listed and evaluated under the term MSD. The main
physical causes for MSDs are lifestyle factors, being overweight, physical (non-)activity, postural problems, sports,
heavy workload and ergonomic aspects [20, 24]. In addition, psychosocial, socioeconomic and environmental
risk factors can be important [20]. Video gaming combines many of these factors like prolonged sitting-periods
with a lack in physical activity, repetitive movements of
the upper limbs and ergonomic burdens. Consequently,
video gaming can be expected to lead to a higher risk for
MSDs. The results of previous research have indicated
this association [15, 25, 26]. Nevertheless, at this moment
there is no overall-evidence of whether video gaming
could affect the musculoskeletal system negatively.
The aim of this systematic review is to give an overview
and review evidence of the extent to which video gaming
influences the musculoskeletal system of gamers. For this
purpose, in this systematic review it was investigated (1)
whether video gaming negatively affects the musculoskeletal system of gamers, (2) to what extent the factor playtime influences musculoskeletal changes and (3) if there
are certain body parts or specific tissues particularly
affected. This is especially important if the imbalances in
video gamer’s health-behavior and special needs are to
be identified. Moreover, these findings could be used for
group specific prevention and rehabilitation recommendations to counteract these behaviors and improve the
health of video gamers.


**Methods**
The protocol for this review was registered and published
in the PROSPERO database (CRD42021220167) and was
reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting
Items for Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) [27].


**Eligibility criteria**
Studies had to be peer-reviewed, published between 2000
and 2021, and written in English. Participants in the studies had to be active video gamers.
All studies in which changes were investigated in the
musculoskeletal system because of video gaming were
of interest. This included issues of bones, cartilages,
ligaments, tendons, muscles and tissues. Of special
interest were negative changes in all human tissues and


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 3 of 16



movements, for example range of motion, muscle tensions, pain syndromes and injuries. Reports about
changes in the posture, muscle-nerve-connectivity or
pain were included, as well as studies of the assessment
of harms like cross-sectional, case–control or longitudinal studies. In addition, experimental studies like randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were also included.
Studies were excluded if they only contained psychological, social, or cardiovascular outcomes. Other
reviews, meta-analysis and case reports were excluded
for this review. Moreover, studies on overweight or obese
people were excluded. Studies with elderly people (over
60 years) were excluded, along with studies which were
restricted to specific musculoskeletal diseases or conditions or psychological, cognitive or social disorders.


**Information sources and search strategy**
Systematic electronic literature searches were undertaken
of PubMed, Web of Science and Cochrane Library databases. Additionally, Google Scholar and reference lists of
included studies were searched unsystematically. The first
systematic electronic literature search was conducted on
08 October 2020 using PubMed and was updated on 01
December 2020 and 26 June 2021. For Web of Science
the first search was conducted on 20 October 2020 and
was updated on 02 December 2020 and 26 June 2021. The
Cochrane Library was searched on 15 December 2020
and this was updated on 26 June 2021. Unsystematic
searches of Google Scholar were conducted on 08 and 09
December 2020. Literature search strategies used medical subject headings (MeSH) and text words related to
video gaming and musculoskeletal, injury or pain (Additional file 1).


**Selection process**
Author 1 and 2 independently screened titles and
abstracts to include studies for full text analysis. The
full text of the included studies were also independently
reviewed by both authors to decide on inclusion or exclusion. Author 3 helped to find a consensus solution for the
cases where there was a disagreement.


**Data collection process**
The systematic electronic literature search results were
uploaded to Citavi 6 [28], a reference management program, to determine if there were duplicates. After that,
literature was uploaded to Rayyan [29], an internet-based
software which facilitates collaboration among reviewers during the study selection process. As the final step, a
manually created excel sheet was used for data extraction
from the included studies.



**Study risk of bias assessment**
An adapted version of the Newcastle–Ottawa Scale
(NOS) for cross sectional studies [30, 31] was used to
evaluate the risk of bias for the included studies. The scale
included four items for selection (maximum 5 stars),
one item for comparability (maximum 2 stars) and two
items for outcome (maximum 3 stars). Therefore, each
selected study was rated with a number from 0 (low quality) to 10 stars (high quality). By definition, a total of 7 or
more stars indicated high quality, 4 to 6 stars indicated
medium quality and 3 or less stars indicated low quality.
Author 1 and 2 independently rated the studies and differences were resolved after a discussion. If there were
further disagreements regarding study ratings Author 3
was involved in order to find a consensus solution.


**Synthesis of results**
It was anticipated that the identified studies in this systematic review would be heterogeneous in the study
design. Therefore, the study results were synthesized narrative without any further statistical analysis. The narrative synthesis is based on the guidelines of the Centre for
Reviews and Dissemination [32].


**Results**
**Study selection**
In Fig. 1: PRISMA Flow chart of study selection it is
shown, that a total of 2017 articles were identified in
three databases and Google Scholar. After removing
duplicates (465), the titles and abstracts of the remaining
1552 studies were screened, of these 1526 studies did not
fit with the inclusion criteria. Thus, a total of 26 full text
articles were assessed for their eligibility. Finally, 16 eligible studies were included for the analysis.


**Study characteristics**
In Table 1: Study characteristics the characteristics are
shown of the 16 included studies. A total of 62,987 participants from ten different countries and four continents
were involved. The dominant population in eleven out
of 16 included studies, were school aged kids and young
adults aged between 5 to 20 years. Studies were mainly
cross sectional, with the exception of one experimental
study [26]. Out of the four possible video gaming devices
(computers, consoles, handhelds, smartphones), seven
studies included one device [25, 26, 33–37], three studies included two devices [38–40] and six studies included
three or more devices [41–46]. Due to insufficient information, it is not possible to rule out that in two studies [37, 39] more than the indicated devices were used.
Overall computers were the most commonly reported
devices in 13 studies. The main body regions of reported


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 4 of 16





musculoskeletal pain were the neck ( _n_ = 7), back ( _n_ = 6),
shoulders ( _n_ = 5) and hands ( _n_ = 5). As the evaluation
method, in eleven of the studies self-designed non-standardized questionnaires were used [25, 36–39, 41–46].
Moreover, in two studies standardized questionnaires or
checklists were used [33, 40] and one study each involved
the use of electromyography (EMG) data and a visual
analog scale [26], a clinical test and a partially standardized questionnaire [34] or only a partially standardized
questionnaire [35].


**Methodological quality**
The risk of bias in all studies was assessed by an adapted
version of the NOS (Additional file 2) and is shown in
Table 2: Risk of bias in individual studies. Ten studies were of high quality with a score of 7 or higher [25,
34, 35, 38–40, 42, 44–46], five studies had a medium
quality with a score between 5–6 [26, 33, 36, 41, 43],
and one study got score of 1 [37] and was rated as low
quality.



**Results of individual studies**
In Table 3: Results of individual studies, the individual
results of the included studies are presented. In eleven
studies a statistical negative impact was reported of video
game playtime [3, 5–7, 9–11, 13, 14, 16, 17] on the musculoskeletal system. In four studies no impact was examined [2, 4, 8, 12] and in one study no effect was found of
video game playtime on the musculoskeletal system [44].
Out of the eleven studies, in which a negative impact of
video game playtime on the musculoskeletal system was
demonstrated, the most reported painful body parts
were the neck (n = 4), shoulder (n = 4) and back (n = 3).
In ten of these studies odds ratios (OR) were calculated
for the dependence of the appearance of musculoskeletal disorders on video game playtime [33–35, 38–40,
42–46]. In order to compare the group of video gamers, in eight studies non-gamers or subjects were used
who played less than one hour a day of video games as
a control group [33, 38, 39, 42–46]. The remaining studies only contained video gaming time < 2.25 h/day [34] or
added every daily hour of video gaming [40] for an OR


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 5 of 16


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 6 of 16


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 7 of 16


**Table 2** Risk of bias in individual studies


**Selection** **Comparability** **Outcome** **Score**



**Study: first author (year)** **1** **2** **3** **4** **5** **6** **7**



Burke (2002) [41] ~~★~~ ~~★~~ ~~★★~~ ~~★~~ 5



Burke (2002) [41] 5

DiFransiciso-Donoghue (2019) [37] ★ 1



DiFransiciso-Donoghue (2019) [37] 1

Hakala (2006) [38] ★ ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 8



Hakala (2006) [38] 8

Hellström (2015) [39] ★ ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 8



Hellström (2015) [39] 8

Kang (2003) [33] ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 6



Kang (2003) [33] 6

Lindberg (2020) [25] ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 7



Lindberg (2020) [25] 7

Ma (2019) [34] ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 7



Ma (2019) [34] 7

Meziat-Filho (2017) [35] ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 7



Meziat-Filho (2017) [35] 7

Sekiguchi (2018a) [42] ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 7



Sekiguchi (2018a) [42] 7

Sekiguchi (2018b) [43] ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 6



Sekiguchi (2018b) [43] 6

Silva (2016) [44] ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 7



Silva (2016) [44] 7

Tazawa (2001) [36] ★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 5



Tazawa (2001) [36] 5

Torsheim (2010) [40] ★ ★ ★★ ★★ ★ ★ 8



Torsheim (2010) [40] 8

Wang (2019) [26] ★★ ★★ ★ 5



Wang (2019) [26] 5

Xavier (2015) [46] ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 7



Xavier (2015) [46] 7

Yabe (2018) [45] ★ ★ ★ ★★ ★ ★ 7



1: Representativeness of the sample; 2: Justified and satisfactory sample size; 3: Non-respondents rate and characteristics; 4: Ascertainment of the exposure or risk
factor (2 stars possible); 5: Comparability of groups based on study design or analysis (2 stars possible); 6: Assessment of the outcome (2 stars possible); 7: Statistical
test description; Score: from 0 (low quality) to 10 stars (high quality)



calculation. In addition, the OR were based on different
evaluation methods (Table 1: Study characteristics) and
models which are described in the appendix (Additional
file 3). A significant increase of the OR was reported in
eight studies [33, 34, 38, 39, 42, 43, 45, 46]. In these studies, the OR ranged from 1.3 to 5.2.


**Discussion**
For the first time, the effect of video game playtime on the
musculoskeletal system of video gamers was examined in
a systematic review. Sixteen articles met the inclusion
criteria of which ten were considered to have a low risk
of bias. The main finding of this study is that video gaming could have a negative impact on the musculoskeletal
system. With regard to this, video gaming duration was
the decisive factor. The odds ratio of musculoskeletal disorders increased up to 5.2 for excessive video game playtime (> 3 h/day).
The first research question can be confirmed, since
in eleven out of 16 studies a negative impact of video
game playtime on the musculoskeletal system was demonstrated. Seven of these studies were rated with a low
risk of bias. The remaining four studies were rated with
a moderate risk of bias. Hence, the overall bias of these
eleven studies can be rated as low to medium. Consequently, the results confirm that video gaming negatively
affects the musculoskeletal system of video gamers.



The second research question, whether excessive video
game playtimes can be determined as a decisive factor
in the development of MSDs, can also be confirmed. In
eight studies a significant increase was reported of OR in
individuals with high video game play times. More precisely, the probability of developing a MSD was significantly increased in subjects with video game playtimes of
about two to three hours per day or more.
From the results the third research question can also
be validated. Video gaming negatively affects different
body parts. Out of the eleven studies, in which a negative impact of video gaming on the musculoskeletal system was demonstrated, the most negatively affected body
parts caused by video gaming were the neck, shoulder
and back. Consequently, video gamers who have excessive playtimes seem to be more vulnerable to developing
pain in the neck, shoulder or back area.


**Protective factors against MSDs**
According to the results video game playtimes had a
negative impact on the musculoskeletal system of video
gamers. Moreover, this effect was amplified in individuals who had higher video game play times. However,
this effect was not amplified in multivariate models
(see Table 3: Results of individual studies). On the contrary, OR tended to decrease in more complex models

[33, 38, 39, 42, 43, 45]. Therefore, some factors could
have reduced the negative effect of video gaming on the


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 8 of 16


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 9 of 16


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 10 of 16


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 11 of 16


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 12 of 16



musculoskeletal system. In particular physical activity and age are well-known factors which can influence
different health parameters [47–49] and may decrease
OR. Physical activity and exercise are factors, which can
counteract or prevent MSDs [49]. Moreover, in some
studies the health benefits have already been shown of
physical activity on the musculoskeletal system in sedentary populations, like video gamers [50]. Additionally,
physical activity and even more sport therapy are typical
and successful treatments used in the rehabilitation process of MSDs [51]. Consequently, physical activity and
exercise could be protective factors which would reduce
the negative health impacts of long continuous video
game playtimes on the musculoskeletal system. Moreover, these interventions are necessary during the rehabilitation of MSDs if full health and performance status are
to be regained of casual and professional video gamers.
In addition to these physical factors, also sleeping habits,
psychosocial balance, socioeconomic status, and environmental and ergonomic factors can either positively
and negatively affect the musculoskeletal system [19, 24,
45]. For this reason, all these factors should be taken into
mind, if excessive video game playtimes occur. In addition, video gamers need to be sensitized about the hazards of excessive and continuous video gaming.


**Population and MSDs**
The majority of the included populations were school
aged kids and young adults in eleven of the 16 studies.
In the remaining studies college students ( _n_ = 3), esports
athletes ( _n_ = 1) and gaming room visitors ( _n_ = 1) were
observed. These populations were domiciled in ten different countries. Hence, cultural, social and psychological differences between the populations might have led to
a variation of the reported diseases, pain or risk factors

[52, 53]. In addition, some populations are known to be
more prone to the development of MSDs. For example,
the highest reported OR was 5.2 in crude and adjusted
analysis [43]. The authors of this study observed young
baseball players, who usually are a vulnerable group for
MSDs in the upper limbs [54, 55]. Consequently, just
playing baseball can be associated with MSD occurrence.
On the other hand, if baseball is the physical activity of
choice this could also be a protective factor, which counteracts the negative impact of video gaming. The crude
and adjusted OR, which included the number of baseball
practice hours among other things, did not differ from
each other. Thus, the population group could have had an
impact, but it seemed not to be as influential as the video
game time in this study. In order to obtain more transparency and a better understanding, studies in which
effects of behaviors on the musculoskeletal system are
observed, should clearly show the singular impacts in



complex statistical analysis. This would provide a better
differentiation of the possible influencing factors.
In addition, in the present study the participants age
range of the included studies ranged between 6 and
35 years. It is known that higher ages are negatively
associated to health related outcomes like MSDs than
younger ages [48]. Therefore, it is even more concerning
that in the majority of included studies, in which young
populations were observed, it was found that there is a
negative association of MSDs and video game playtime.
In conclusion, high video gaming times can already cause
MSDs in children and adolescents. Hence, the early
spread of information to parents and kids is necessary
about the negative association of MSDs and excessive
video game playtimes. On the other hand, specific and
tailored prevention and health promotion programs for
(young) video gamers are needed.


**Screen‑based activities and MSD**
As previously mentioned, video gaming is mostly a sedentary activity and comparable with other screen-based
activities like office work. Accordingly, different kind of
MSDs have been associated to screen-based activities

[56–58]. Therefore, several joints could be affected in different ways and with varying severities. The most affected
pain regions in this review were the neck (36%), shoulder
(36%) back (27%). Due to the heterogeneity in observed
gaming devises and the possibility of multiple answers,
no specific devise could be connected to one pain region.
However, in some studies it has been shown that there
is an association of specific screen-based activities with
MSDs. It could be demonstrated that watching TV was
associated with chronic musculoskeletal pain in Brazilian
schoolteachers [59]. The authors showed that an increase
in TV watch time by 30 min per day was associated
with a 5.1% higher probability of having chronic musculoskeletal pain in the long-term. On the other hand,
they also showed that an increase in physical activity by
60 min per week was associated with a 6.2% lower probability of chronic musculoskeletal pain. Therefore, they
rated watching TV and physical activity as independent
parameters, which effect MSDs in opposite ways.
Smartphone use has been associated with MSDs in the
literature. In particular, upper limb [60, 61] and wrist
pain [62] are common complaints. Similar results are
shown in the present review. In six studies the effect of
video game playtime on upper limb joints were analyzed.
In four of them a significant increase was reported in OR
of disorders or pain in at least one joint caused by excessive video game playing (> 2-3 h/day) [33, 34, 38, 43].
These effects on the upper limbs are not surprising when
the biomechanics of smartphone use is visualized, as it
requires predominately upper limb activity. Additionally,


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 13 of 16



excessive smartphone use (≥ 5 h/day) has been associated with lower back pain [63]. In contrast, the authors
reported that all time intervals of computer use were
associated with lower back pain. These results could be
explained by the flexibility of smartphone usage compared with computer use. Smartphone use is independent of location and posture, can be executed along with
physical activities like walking, and allows, therefore,
more mobility and adaptability to delay the beginning of
symptoms. In comparison, computer use is mostly a sedentary behavior, which needs a fixed place and thus limits
the mobility of users.
Negative associations of neck pain in computer users
have also been presented in a systematic review [58].
The relation of continuous computer use and neck pain
was significant with constant mouse (> 2 h) or computer
use (> 6 h). The authors also reported the associations of
stressful and breakless work postures with neck pain. It
can be assumed that the combination of physical inactivity, unilateral postures and repetitive movements of the
upper limbs are the reasons for this. These results reinforce the findings of our review that video game playtimes of at least two to three hours a day were highly
associated with MSDs.
A related analysis of 45,555 pre-adolescents showed the
association of screen time in general and the degree of
spinal pain [64]. It was found that the relative risk ratio in
children increased with increasing hours spent in front of
a screen, independent of physical activity. Consequently,
screen-based activities could be considered as independent risk factors for MSD. Moreover, plenty of other
health risk factors like depression in adults [65] and children [66] or obesity in childhood [67] have been linked
to screen-based activities. In summary, not only video
gaming, but also other screen-based activities can harm
the human musculoskeletal system even if they have different requirements. In particular, continuous computer
work and smartphone use were associated with MSDs
and other health issues. Consequently, a combination of
excessive working and leisure time screen-based activities, could lead to a highly increased risk of developing a
MSD in all ages. These problems need to be counteracted
at an early age.


**Limitations**
The results obtained in this work must be interpreted
in the light of some limitations. First, the methodological quality of included studies is heterogeneous. Six out
of 16 studies have a moderate to low quality, which must
be recognized when interpreting any of the results. In
addition, this review just included English articles, which
can cause a language bias. Especially articles from countries with a big video gaming community, like China or



Korea, could have been beneficial. Second, there is a lack
of interventional studies in this research field, which are
needed if causality is to be examined. Except for one
study, the included studies had a cross-sectional design.
In this design a direct causality cannot be assumed. However, if the statistics are adapted using cofactors and
covariates, the principles of mediation should allow an
association to be made. Third, the generic term musculoskeletal disorders includes different kinds of conditions
and diseases. Consequently, there was a high heterogeneity of MSD definitions and an inconsistency of the
evaluation methods of the included studies. Due to the
versatility of the term MSD there was a lack of standardization of the measurement methods of MSDs. In particular, self-designed non-standardized questionnaires were
mainly used for MSD evaluation. Therefore, a generalization of the results is limited because too many different
non-validated measurement methods were used.


**Conclusion**
In eleven out of 16 studies a negative impact was demonstrated for video game playtime on the musculoskeletal system. Moreover, excessive video game playtimes
(> 3 h/day) seemed to be a predictor for the appearance
of MSDs. In particular, the neck, shoulder and back were
the most negatively affected body regions. The combination of continuous sitting, physical inactivity and repetitive movements of the upper limbs might be the reasons
for that. Additionally, other screen-based activities could
even amplify this association. Due to the great popularity of video gaming across multiple generations, specific
and tailored prevention and health promotion programs
for video gamers need to be developed to counteract this
immense public health issue. Not only casual video gamers, but also and especially esports athletes should be
aware of this if they are to counteract the negative effects
of long video game playtimes. For this purpose, it seems
reasonable that esports professionals should serve as role
models for casual video gamers. In particular, possible
correlations between MSDs and different game genres
should be observed. Hence, future research should be
focused on prevention and health promotion programs
for this target group in order to provide a basis for recommendations. Furthermore, studies are needed in
which more details of the requirements and burdens are
demonstrated on the human body while video gaming.


**Abbreviations**
GDP: Gross Domestic Product; EMG: Electromyography; MeSH: Medical Subject Headings; MSDs: Musculoskeletal Disorders; NCD: Non-Communicable
Diseases; NOS: Newcastle–Ottawa Scale; OR: Odds Ratio; PRISMA: Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses; RCTs: Randomized
Controlled Trials.


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 14 of 16



**Supplementary Information**

[The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-022-05614-0)
[org/​10.​1186/​s12891-​022-​05614-0.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-022-05614-0)


**Additional file 1.** Search strategy.

**Additional file 2.** Adapted Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale.

**Additional file 3.** OR models of individual studies.


**Acknowledgements**
Not applicable.


**Authors’ contributions**
All authors participated in the study design, have read the manuscript, and
approved it. CT, PB: search strategy execution, manuscript preparation, database interpretation, statistical analysis, and manuscript revision. KW, GC: database interpretation, statistical analysis, consensus decision and manuscript
revision. IF: database interpretation and manuscript revision.


**Funding**
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. The authors
have not received any financial support for this work.


**Availability of data and materials**
All the data generated and analyzed during this study are included in this
published article and its appendix.


**Declarations**


**Ethics approval and consent to participate**
Not applicable.


**Consent for publication**
Not applicable.


**Competing interests**
The authors report no conflicts of interest.


**Author details**
1 Institute of Movement Therapy and Movement‑oriented Prevention
and Rehabilitation, German Sport University Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
2 Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of the German Social Accident
Insurance, Sankt Augustin, Germany. [3] University of Applied Management,
Ismaning, Germany.


Received: 27 April 2022  Accepted: 1 July 2022


**References**
1. Morse KF, Fine PA, Friedlander KJ. Creativity and Leisure During COVID-19:
Examining the Relationship Between Leisure Activities, Motivations, and
[Psychological Well-Being. Front Psychol. 2021;12: 609967. https://​doi.​org/​](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.609967)
[10.​3389/​fpsyg.​2021.​609967.](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.609967)
2. DFC Intelligence. Global Video Game Consumer Segmentation. 2020.
[https://​www.​dfcint.​com/​produ​ct/​video-​game-​consu​mer-​segme​ntati​](https://www.dfcint.com/product/video-game-consumer-segmentation-2/)
[on-2/.](https://www.dfcint.com/product/video-game-consumer-segmentation-2/)
3. Newzoo. Global Games Market Report: The VR & Metaverse Edition.
[2021. https://​resou​rces.​newzoo.​com/​hubfs/​Repor​ts/​2021_​Free_​Global_​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/2021_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202021&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=137510824&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-9SMuJv0HTWrGscoB62ryibzF4AkNR1Mgca-naHOOz2lP1rH2vi_D3AdLX-bxYs7vm-lx8SMGdqdnLh4e6iTqxoeuTu-w&utm_content=137510824&utm_source=hs_automation)
[Games_​Market_​Report.​pdf?​utm_​campa​ign=​GGMR%​20202​1&​utm_​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/2021_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202021&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=137510824&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-9SMuJv0HTWrGscoB62ryibzF4AkNR1Mgca-naHOOz2lP1rH2vi_D3AdLX-bxYs7vm-lx8SMGdqdnLh4e6iTqxoeuTu-w&utm_content=137510824&utm_source=hs_automation)
[medium=​email​&_​hsmi=​13751​0824&_​hsenc=​p2ANq​tz-​9SMuJ​v0HTW​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/2021_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202021&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=137510824&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-9SMuJv0HTWrGscoB62ryibzF4AkNR1Mgca-naHOOz2lP1rH2vi_D3AdLX-bxYs7vm-lx8SMGdqdnLh4e6iTqxoeuTu-w&utm_content=137510824&utm_source=hs_automation)
[rGsco​B62ry​ibzF4​AkNR1​Mgca-​naHOO​z2lP1​rH2vi_​D3AdLX-​bxYs7​vm-​lx8SM​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/2021_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202021&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=137510824&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-9SMuJv0HTWrGscoB62ryibzF4AkNR1Mgca-naHOOz2lP1rH2vi_D3AdLX-bxYs7vm-lx8SMGdqdnLh4e6iTqxoeuTu-w&utm_content=137510824&utm_source=hs_automation)
[Gdqdn​Lh4e6​iTqxo​euTu-​w&​utm_​conte​nt=​13751​0824&​utm_​source=​hs_​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/2021_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202021&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=137510824&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-9SMuJv0HTWrGscoB62ryibzF4AkNR1Mgca-naHOOz2lP1rH2vi_D3AdLX-bxYs7vm-lx8SMGdqdnLh4e6iTqxoeuTu-w&utm_content=137510824&utm_source=hs_automation)
[autom​ation.](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/2021_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202021&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=137510824&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-9SMuJv0HTWrGscoB62ryibzF4AkNR1Mgca-naHOOz2lP1rH2vi_D3AdLX-bxYs7vm-lx8SMGdqdnLh4e6iTqxoeuTu-w&utm_content=137510824&utm_source=hs_automation)
4. IHRSA. The 2020 IHRSA Global Report: The State of the Health Club Indus[try. 2020. https://​www.​ihrsa.​org/​publi​catio​ns/​the-​2020-​ihrsa-​global-​repor​](https://www.ihrsa.org/publications/the-2020-ihrsa-global-report/#)
[t/#.](https://www.ihrsa.org/publications/the-2020-ihrsa-global-report/#)



5. Unity. Covid-19’s impact on the gaming industry: 19 takeaways: An
examination of pandemic gaming behavior and game montization. 2020.
[https://​images.​respo​nse.​unity​3d.​com/​Web/​Unity/%​7B1d8​bb073-​24ca-​](https://images.response.unity3d.com/Web/Unity/%7B1d8bb073-24ca-45ae-9b26-4ec9ac2e3fb4%7D_Unity-Monetization-Covid-19-Insights-v3.7.pdf?elqTrackId=0cf1b3ba3dd04d708e2731e75ddaa324&elqaid=2721&elqat=2)
[45ae-​9b26-​4ec9a​c2e3f​b4%​7D_​Unity-​Monet​izati​on-​Covid-​19-​Insig​hts-​](https://images.response.unity3d.com/Web/Unity/%7B1d8bb073-24ca-45ae-9b26-4ec9ac2e3fb4%7D_Unity-Monetization-Covid-19-Insights-v3.7.pdf?elqTrackId=0cf1b3ba3dd04d708e2731e75ddaa324&elqaid=2721&elqat=2)
[v3.7.​pdf?​elqTr​ackId=​0cf1b​3ba3d​d04d7​08e27​31e75​ddaa3​24&​elqaid=​](https://images.response.unity3d.com/Web/Unity/%7B1d8bb073-24ca-45ae-9b26-4ec9ac2e3fb4%7D_Unity-Monetization-Covid-19-Insights-v3.7.pdf?elqTrackId=0cf1b3ba3dd04d708e2731e75ddaa324&elqaid=2721&elqat=2)
[2721&​elqat=2.](https://images.response.unity3d.com/Web/Unity/%7B1d8bb073-24ca-45ae-9b26-4ec9ac2e3fb4%7D_Unity-Monetization-Covid-19-Insights-v3.7.pdf?elqTrackId=0cf1b3ba3dd04d708e2731e75ddaa324&elqaid=2721&elqat=2)
6. López-Cabarcos MÁ, Ribeiro-Soriano D, Piñeiro-Chousa J. All that glitters
is not gold. The rise of gaming in the COVID-19 pandemic. J Innovation
[Knowledge. 2020;5:289–96. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jik.​2020.​10.​004.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jik.2020.10.004)
7. Tremblay MS, Aubert S, Barnes JD, Saunders TJ, Carson V, Latimer-Cheung
AE, et al. Sedentary Behavior Research Network (SBRN) - Terminology
Consensus Project process and outcome. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act.
[2017;14:75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12966-​017-​0525-8.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-017-0525-8)
8. de Rezende LFM, Rodrigues Lopes M, Rey-López JP, Matsudo VKR, Luiz
OdC. Sedentary behavior and health outcomes: an overview of system[atic reviews. PLoS One. 2014;9:e105620. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0105620)
[pone.​01056​20.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0105620)
9. Park JH, Moon JH, Kim HJ, Kong MH, Oh YH. Sedentary Lifestyle: Overview
of Updated Evidence of Potential Health Risks. Korean J Fam Med.
[2020;41:365–73. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4082/​kjfm.​20.​0165.](https://doi.org/10.4082/kjfm.20.0165)
10. Ekelund U, Steene-Johannessen J, Brown WJ, Fagerland MW, Owen N,
Powell KE, et al. Does physical activity attenuate, or even eliminate, the
detrimental association of sitting time with mortality? A harmonised
meta-analysis of data from more than 1 million men and women. Lancet.
[2016;388:1302–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0140-​6736(16)​30370-1.](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30370-1)
11. Hodgetts CJ, Leboeuf-Yde C, Beynon A, Walker BF. Shoulder pain prevalence by age and within occupational groups: a systematic review. Arch
[Physiother. 2021;11:24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s40945-​021-​00119-w.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40945-021-00119-w)
12. Gawke JC, Gorgievski MJ, van der Linden D. Office work and complaints
of the arms, neck and shoulders: the role of job characteristics, muscular
[tension and need for recovery. J Occup Health. 2012;54:323–30. https://​](https://doi.org/10.1539/joh.11-0152-oa)
[doi.​org/​10.​1539/​joh.​11-​0152-​oa.](https://doi.org/10.1539/joh.11-0152-oa)
13. Jenny SE, Manning RD, Keiper MC, Olrich TW. Virtual(ly) Athletes: Where
[eSports Fit Within the Definition of “Sport.” Quest. 2017;69:1–18. https://​](https://doi.org/10.1080/00336297.2016.1144517)
[doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00336​297.​2016.​11445​17.](https://doi.org/10.1080/00336297.2016.1144517)
14. Borecki L, Tolstych K, Pokorski M. Computer games and fine motor skills.
[Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;755:343–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-​94-​007-​](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4546-9_43)
[4546-9_​43.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4546-9_43)
15. Zwibel H, DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, DeFeo A, Yao S. An Osteopathic
Physician’s Approach to the Esports Athlete. J Am Osteopath Assoc.
[2019;119:756–62. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7556/​jaoa.​2019.​125.](https://doi.org/10.7556/jaoa.2019.125)
16. Funk DC, Pizzo AD, Baker BJ. eSport management: Embracing eSport
education and research opportunities. Sport Manage Rev. 2018;21:7–13.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​smr.​2017.​07.​008.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smr.2017.07.008)
17. Jalink MB, Heineman E, Pierie J-PEN, ten Cate Hoedemaker, Henk O. Nintendo related injuries and other problems: review. BMJ. 2014;349:g7267.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmj.​g7267.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g7267)
18. Toosi KK, Hogaboom NS, Oyster ML, Boninger ML. Computer keyboarding
biomechanics and acute changes in median nerve indicative of carpal
[tunnel syndrome. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2015;30:546–50. https://​](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2015.04.008)
[doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​clinb​iomech.​2015.​04.​008.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2015.04.008)
19. Roquelaure Y. Musculoskeletal Disorders and Psychosocial Factors at
[Work. SSRN Journal. 2018. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​33161​43.](https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3316143)
20. Kok J de, Vroonhof P, Snijders J, Roullis G, Clarke M, Peereboom K, et al.
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders: Prevalence, costs and demo[graphics in the EU. 2019. https://​osha.​europa.​eu/​en/​publi​catio​ns/​work-​](https://osha.europa.eu/en/publications/work-related-musculoskeletal-disorders-prevalence-costs-and-demographics-eu/view)
[relat​ed-​muscu​loske​letal-​disor​ders-​preva​lence-​costs-​and-​demog​raphi​](https://osha.europa.eu/en/publications/work-related-musculoskeletal-disorders-prevalence-costs-and-demographics-eu/view)
[cs-​eu/​view. Accessed 20 Jan 2022.](https://osha.europa.eu/en/publications/work-related-musculoskeletal-disorders-prevalence-costs-and-demographics-eu/view)
21. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and
Medicine Division; Board on Health Care Services; Committee on Identifying Disabling Medical Conditions Likely to Improve with Treatment.
Selected health conditions and likelihood of improvement with treat[ment. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2020. https://​doi.​](https://doi.org/10.17226/25662)
[org/​10.​17226/​25662.](https://doi.org/10.17226/25662)
22. Kuorinka I, Jonsson B, Kilbom A, Vinterberg H, Biering-Sørensen F, Andersson G, Jørgensen K. Standardised Nordic questionnaires for the analysis
[of musculoskeletal symptoms. Appl Ergon. 1987;18:233–7. https://​doi.​](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-6870(87)90010-x)
[org/​10.​1016/​0003-​6870(87)​90010-x.](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-6870(87)90010-x)
23. Finkelstein H. Stenosing tendovaginitis at the radial styloid process. J
Bone Joint Surg. 1930;12:509–40.


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 15 of 16



24. Schmidt K, Friedrichs P, Cornelsen HC, Schmidt P, Tischer T. Musculoskeletal disorders among children and young people: prevalence, risk factors,
[preventive measures. 2021. https://​healt​hy-​workp​laces.​eu/​en/​publi​catio​](https://healthy-workplaces.eu/en/publications/musculoskeletal-disorders-among-children-and-young-people-prevalence-risk-factors-preventive-measures)
[ns/​muscu​loske​letal-​disor​ders-​among-​child​ren-​and-​young-​people-​preva​](https://healthy-workplaces.eu/en/publications/musculoskeletal-disorders-among-children-and-young-people-prevalence-risk-factors-preventive-measures)
[lence-​risk-​facto​rs-​preve​ntive-​measu​res.](https://healthy-workplaces.eu/en/publications/musculoskeletal-disorders-among-children-and-young-people-prevalence-risk-factors-preventive-measures)
25. Lindberg L, Nielsen SB, Damgaard M, Sloth OR, Rathleff MS, Straszek CL.
Musculoskeletal pain is common in competitive gaming: a cross-sectional study among Danish esports athletes. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med.
[2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmjsem-​2020-​000799.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-2020-000799)
26. Wang D, Tang L, Wu H, Gu D. Analysis of the effect of overusing thumbs
[on smartphone games. J Int Med Res. 2019;47:6244–53. https://​doi.​org/​](https://doi.org/10.1177/0300060519881016)
[10.​1177/​03000​60519​881016.](https://doi.org/10.1177/0300060519881016)
27. Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD,
et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting
[systematic reviews. BMJ. 2021;372: n71. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmj.​n71.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71)
[28. Swiss Academic Software GmbH. Citavi (6); 2020. https://​www.​citavi.​com.](https://www.citavi.com)
29. Ouzzani M, Hammady H, Fedorowicz Z, Elmagarmid A. Rayyan-a web and
[mobile app for systematic reviews. Syst Rev. 2016;5:210. https://​doi.​org/​](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-016-0384-4)
[10.​1186/​s13643-​016-​0384-4.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-016-0384-4)
30. Wells GA, Wells G, Shea B, Shea B, O’Connell D, Peterson J, WelchLosos M,
Tugwell P, Ga SW, Zello GA, Petersen JA. The newcastle-ottawa scale (nos)
for assessing the quality of nonrandomised studies in meta-analyses.
2014.
31. Modesti PA, Reboldi G, Cappuccio FP, Agyemang C, Remuzzi G, Rapi S,
et al. Panethnic Differences in Blood Pressure in Europe: A Systematic
[Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS ONE. 2016;11:e0147601. https://​doi.​org/​](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0147601)
[10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​01476​01.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0147601)
32. Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. CRD’s guidance for undertaking
reviews in healthcare. 3rd ed. York: York Publ. Services; 2009.
33. Kang J-W, Kim H, Cho S-H, Lee M-K, Kim Y-D, Nan H-M, Lee C-H. The association of subjective stress, urinary catecholamine concentrations and
PC game room use and musculoskeletal disorders of the upper limbs in
[young male Koreans. J Korean Med Sci. 2003;18:419–24. https://​doi.​org/​](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2003.18.3.419)
[10.​3346/​jkms.​2003.​18.3.​419.](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2003.18.3.419)
34. Ma T, Song L, Ning S, Wang H, Zhang G, Wu Z. Relationship between
the incidence of de Quervain’s disease among teenagers and mobile
[gaming. Int Orthop. 2019;43:2587–92. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00264-019-04389-9)
[s00264-​019-​04389-9.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00264-019-04389-9)
35. Meziat-Filho N, Azevedo e Silva G, Coutinho ES, Mendonca R, Santos V.
Association between home posture habits and neck pain in High School
adolescents. J Back and Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation. 2017;30:467–75.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​3233/​bmr-​150339.](https://doi.org/10.3233/bmr-150339)
36. Tazawa Y, Okada K. Physical signs associated with excessive television[game playing and sleep deprivation. Pediatr Int. 2001;43:647–50. https://​](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1442-200x.2001.01466.x)
[doi.​org/​10.​1046/j.​1442-​200x.​2001.​01466.x.](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1442-200x.2001.01466.x)
37. DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, Balentine J, Schmidt G, Zwibel H. Managing the
health of the eSport athlete: an integrated health management model.
[BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med. 2019;5:e000467–e000467. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467)
[1136/​bmjsem-​2018-​000467.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467)
38. Hakala PT, Rimpelä AH, Saarni LA, Salminen JJ. Frequent computerrelated activities increase the risk of neck-shoulder and low back pain in
[adolescents. Eur J Public Health. 2006;16:536–41. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckl025)
[eurpub/​ckl025.](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckl025)
39. Hellström C, Nilsson KW, Leppert J, Åslund C. Effects of adolescent online
gaming time and motives on depressive, musculoskeletal, and psycho[somatic symptoms. Ups J Med Sci. 2015;120:263–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.3109/03009734.2015.1049724)
[3109/​03009​734.​2015.​10497​24.](https://doi.org/10.3109/03009734.2015.1049724)
40. Torsheim T, Eriksson L, Schnohr CW, Hansen F, Bjarnason T, Välimaa R.
Screen-based activities and physical complaints among adolescents from
[the Nordic countries. BMC Public Health. 2010;10:324. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-10-324)
[1186/​1471-​2458-​10-​324.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-10-324)
41. Burke A, Peper E. Cumulative trauma disorder risk for children using computer products: Results of a pilot investigation with a student conveni[ence sample. Public Health Rep. 2002;117:350–7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0033-3549(04)50171-1)
[s0033-​3549(04)​50171-1.](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0033-3549(04)50171-1)
42. Sekiguchi T, Hagiwara Y, Momma H, Tsuchiya M, Kuroki K, Kanazawa K,
et al. Excessive game playing is associated with musculoskeletal pain
among youth athletes: a cross-sectional study in Miyagi prefecture. J
[Sports Sci. 2018;36:1801–7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02640​414.​2017.​14204​](https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2017.1420453)
[53.](https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2017.1420453)



43. Sekiguchi T, Hagiwara Y, Yabe Y, Tsuchiya M, Itaya N, Yoshida S, et al. Playing video games for more than 3 hours a day is associated with shoulder
and elbow pain in elite young male baseball players. J Shoulder Elbow
[Surg. 2018;27:1629–35. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jse.​2018.​06.​005.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jse.2018.06.005)
44. Silva GR, Rodarti Pitangui AC, Andrade Xavier MK, Valois Correia-Junior
MA, de Araujo RC. Prevalence of musculoskeletal pain in adolescents
and association with computer and videogame use. J Pediatr (Rio J).
[2016;92:188–96. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jped.​2015.​06.​006.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jped.2015.06.006)
45. Yabe Y, Hagiwara Y, Sekiguchi T, Momma H, Tsuchiya M, Kuroki K, et al.
Late bedtimes, short sleeping time, and longtime video-game playing
are associated with low back pain in school-aged athletes. Eur Spine J.
[2018;27:1112–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00586-​017-​5177-5.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-017-5177-5)
46. Xavier MKA, RodartiPitangui AC, ReisSilva GR, de Oliveira VMA,
Beltrao NB, de Araujo RC. Prevalence of headache in adolescents and
association with use of computer and videogames. Cien Saude Colet.
[2015;20:3477–86. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1590/​1413-​81232​01520​11.​19272​](https://doi.org/10.1590/1413-812320152011.19272014)
[014.](https://doi.org/10.1590/1413-812320152011.19272014)
47. Reiner M, Niermann C, Jekauc D, Woll A. Long-term health benefits
of physical activity–a systematic review of longitudinal studies. BMC
[Public Health. 2013;13:813. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​1471-​2458-​13-​813.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-813)
48. Okunribido OO, Wynn T, Lewis D. Are older workers at greater risk
of musculoskeletal disorders in the workplace than young workers?

[– A literature review. OER. 2011;10:53–68. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3233/​](https://doi.org/10.3233/OER-2011-0192)
[OER-​2011-​0192.](https://doi.org/10.3233/OER-2011-0192)
49. Mansi S, Milosavljevic S, Baxter GD, Tumilty S, Hendrick P. A systematic
review of studies using pedometers as an intervention for musculoskel[etal diseases. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014;15:231. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-15-231)
[1186/​1471-​2474-​15-​231.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-15-231)
50. Tersa-Miralles C, Bravo C, Bellon F, Pastells-Peiró R, Rubinat Arnaldo E,
Rubí-Carnacea F. Effectiveness of workplace exercise interventions in the
treatment of musculoskeletal disorders in office workers: a systematic
[review. BMJ Open. 2022;12:e054288. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmjop​](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054288)
[en-​2021-​054288.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054288)
51. Sharan D, Mohandoss M, Ranganathan R, Jose J. Musculoskeletal
disorders of the upper extremities due to extensive usage of hand held
[devices. Ann Occup Environ Med. 2014;26:22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40557-014-0022-3)
[s40557-​014-​0022-3.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40557-014-0022-3)
52. Coggon D, Ntani G, Palmer KT, Felli VE, Harari R, Barrero LH, et al. Disabling
musculoskeletal pain in working populations: is it the job, the person, or
[the culture? Pain. 2013;154:856–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pain.​2013.​](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2013.02.008)
[02.​008.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2013.02.008)
53. Murray CJL, Aravkin AY, Zheng P, Abbafati C, Abbas KM, Abbasi-Kangevari
M, et al. Global burden of 87 risk factors in 204 countries and territories,
1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
[2019. Lancet. 2020;396:1223–49. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0140-​6736(20)​](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30752-2)
[30752-2.](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30752-2)
54. Lyman S, Fleisig GS, Waterbor JW, Funkhouser EM, Pulley L, Andrews JR,
et al. Longitudinal study of elbow and shoulder pain in youth baseball
[pitchers. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:1803–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005768-200111000-00002)
[00005​768-​20011​1000-​00002.](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005768-200111000-00002)
55. Matsuura T, Suzue N, Iwame T, Arisawa K, Fukuta S, Sairyo K. Epidemiology
of shoulder and elbow pain in youth baseball players. Phys Sportsmed.
[2016;44:97–100. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00913​847.​2016.​11494​22.](https://doi.org/10.1080/00913847.2016.1149422)
56. Waongenngarm P, van der Beek AJ, Akkarakittichoke N, Janwantanakul P. Perceived musculoskeletal discomfort and its association with
postural shifts during 4-h prolonged sitting in office workers. Appl Ergon.
[2020;89:103225. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​apergo.​2020.​103225.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2020.103225)
57. Feng B, Chen K, Zhu X, Ip W-Y, Andersen LL, Page P, Wang Y. Prevalence
and risk factors of self-reported wrist and hand symptoms and clinically
confirmed carpal tunnel syndrome among office workers in China: a
[cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2021;21:57. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-10137-1)
[1186/​s12889-​020-​10137-1.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-10137-1)
58. Keown GA, Tuchin PA. Workplace Factors Associated With Neck Pain Experienced by Computer Users: A Systematic Review. J Manipulative Physiol
[Ther. 2018;41:508–29. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jmpt.​2018.​01.​005.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmpt.2018.01.005)
59. Da Santos MCS, Gabani FL, Dias DF, de Andrade SM, González AD, Loch
MR, Mesas AE. Longitudinal associations of changes in physical activity
and TV viewing with chronic musculoskeletal pain in Brazilian school[teachers. PLoS ONE. 2020;15:e0234609. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0234609#sec002)
[pone.​02346​09#​sec002.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0234609#sec002)


Tholl _et al. BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders     (2022) 23:678_ Page 16 of 16


60. Almomani F, Alghwiri AA, Alghadir AH, Al-Momani A, Iqbal A. Prevalence
of upper limb pain and disability and its correlates with demographic
[and personal factors. J Pain Res. 2019;12:2691–700. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.2147/JPR.S198480)
[2147/​JPR.​S1984​80.](https://doi.org/10.2147/JPR.S198480)
61. Alsalameh AM, Harisi MJ, Alduayji MA, Almutham AA, Mahmood FM.
Evaluating the relationship between smartphone addiction/overuse
and musculoskeletal pain among medical students at Qassim University.
[J Family Med Prim Care. 2019;8:2953–9. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4103/​jfmpc.​](https://doi.org/10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_665_19)
[jfmpc_​665_​19.](https://doi.org/10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_665_19)
62. Amjad F, Farooq MN, Batool R, Irshad A. Frequency of wrist pain and its
associated risk factors in students using mobile phones. Pak J Med Sci.
[2020;36:746–9. https://​doi.​org/​10.​12669/​pjms.​36.4.​1797.](https://doi.org/10.12669/pjms.36.4.1797)
63. Silva AG, Sa-Couto P, Queirós A, Neto M, Rocha NP. Pain, pain intensity
and pain disability in high school students are differently associated with
physical activity, screening hours and sleep. BMC Musculoskelet Disord.
[2017;18:194. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12891-​017-​1557-6.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-017-1557-6)
64. Joergensen AC, Strandberg-Larsen K, Andersen PK, Hestbaek L, Andersen
AM-N. Spinal pain in pre-adolescence and the relation with screen time
and physical activity behavior. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2021;22:393.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12891-​021-​04263-z.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-021-04263-z)
65. Wang X, Li Y, Fan H. The associations between screen time-based
sedentary behavior and depression: a systematic review and meta[analysis. BMC Public Health. 2019;19:1524. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-7904-9)
[s12889-​019-​7904-9.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-7904-9)
66. Liu M, Wu L, Yao S. Dose-response association of screen time-based
sedentary behaviour in children and adolescents and depression: a
meta-analysis of observational studies. Br J Sports Med. 2016;50:1252–8.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bjspo​rts-​2015-​095084.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2015-095084)
67. Fang K, Mu M, Liu K, He Y. Screen time and childhood overweight/
obesity: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Child Care Health Dev.
[2019;45:744–53. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​cch.​12701.](https://doi.org/10.1111/cch.12701)


**Publisher’s Note**
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.












