Soffner _et al._
_Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41043-023-00373-7



Journal of Health, Population
and Nutrition


## **RESEARCH Open Access**
# Dietary behavior of video game players and esports players in Germany: a cross‑sectional study

Markus Soffner [1*], Peter Bickmann [1], Chuck Tholl [1] and Ingo Froböse [1]


**Abstract**
**Background** Video gaming and competitive gaming (esports) are gaining more and more recognition in society as
well as in research. Increasingly, health-related topics are the focus of research on video game and esports players.
Although video gaming is often associated with energy drinks and fast food, no studies have yet examined the players’ dietary behavior. Therefore, the aim of this cross-sectional study is to investigate the dietary behavior and additional health-related data of video game players and esports players in Germany.
**Methods** Between July and October 2020, 817 participants (87.1% male; 24.2 ± 6.9 years), divided into video game
players and esports players, were surveyed via an online questionnaire about their dietary, health, and gaming behaviors. Descriptive statistics were performed on all questions. To investigate statistically significant differences between
video game players and esports players, the Mann–Whitney-U-Test and Kruskall-Wallis-Test were used. Partial Spearman correlations were used to examine possible associations between dietary behavior, health status, well-being, and
video game playing time.
**Results** Water was the primary source of fluid intake for the players (10.9 ± 7.0 l/week). The average weekly consumption of energy drinks was 0.4 ± 0.9 L. Energy drinks (rho = 0.14; p < 0.01) as well as soft drinks (rho = 0.14; p < 0.01) are
positively correlated with the video game playing time. Participants ate 7.5 ± 10.4 servings of fast food per month,
which has a positive association with video game playing time (rho = 0.13; p < 0.01). In contrast, vegetables (1.7 ± 1.6
servings/day) and fruits (0.9 ± 1.0 servings/day) are eaten almost daily.
**Conclusion** In this survey, the dietary behavior of video game players and esports players is similar to that of the German general population. Nevertheless, there is a need for improvement. Especially energy drinks, which are already
documented to have adverse health effects, should be limited. In addition, the consumption of fast food and meat
should also be reduced, and healthier foods such as fruits and vegetables should be increased instead. Early education and support regarding the associated risks with unhealthy foods is important within the target group.
**Keywords** Gaming, Food frequency questionnaire, Nutrition, Well-being



*Correspondence:
Markus Soffner
m.soffner@dshs-koeln.de
1 Institute of Movement Therapy and Movement‑Oriented Prevention
and Rehabilitation, German Sport University Cologne, Cologne, Germany



**Introduction**
Competitive gaming (esports) and video gaming have
long ceased to be a simple trend. In recent years, the field
has grown steadily, gained more and more recognition in
society, and is becoming increasingly popular as a recreational activity. The numbers of active players and people
who watch video games via streams are rising every year

[1]. The COVID-19 pandemic gave a particular boost to



© The Author(s) 2023. **Open Access** This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
[licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://​creat​iveco​](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[mmons.​org/​publi​cdoma​in/​zero/1.​0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 2 of 13



gaming. Since the outbreak, the time spent gaming has
significantly increased [2].
The rising interest in gaming is also reflected in
research. Since 2015, publications have grown consistently [3]. Scientists are becoming increasingly concerned about people who play video games, particularly
from a health standpoint, and are conducting extensive
research into the health of gamers. The high playing
times are a particular risk [4]. Because video gaming is
a screen-based activity like working at a computer, this
activity is characterized by long periods of sitting and
is often accompanied by a sedentary lifestyle [5, 6]. This
often results in musculoskeletal disorders [7]. Furthermore, long periods of sitting are already recognized as
a risk factor for numerous chronic diseases [8–10] and
all-cause mortality [11–13]. For these reasons, not only
compensatory exercise but also a balanced and healthy
diet can somewhat counteract these risks. However, the
dietary behavior of gamers has not been studied so far.
Clichés about gamers’ excessive consumption of fast food
and energy drinks exist. Increased consumption of this
can lead to weight gain and diseases like diabetes [14–
16]. Overall, unhealthy nutrition can be the cause of obesity [17], heart diseases [18], or metabolic disorders [19,
20]. As a result, the target group of video game players
and esports players is at greater risk when combined with
a sedentary lifestyle.
However, there is a lack of evidence when examining
the diet of gamers. Hence, the aim of this exploratory
study is to investigate the dietary behavior of video game
players and esports players in Germany. Additionally,
health behaviors and body image were surveyed. Collecting data on the players’ dietary behavior is essential for
providing specific health promotion to this at-risk target
group over the long term.


**Materials and methods**
**Study design and setting**
The current study is a successor to the eSports Study
2019 [21] and 2020 [22] with a different focus and was
carried out as a cross-sectional online survey. The data
collection took place from July to October 2020. Due to
the COVID-19 pandemic, the questionnaire was distributed exclusively online in digital form. For this purpose,
video gaming and esports platforms, the project-related
website ( _esportwissen.de_ ), and social media ( _Facebook,_
_Instagram, Discord_ ) were used. In addition, esports
organizations were contacted, and gaming websites
wrote articles about the survey to further promote it. To
motivate potential participants for the survey, the aim of
the study and eligibility criteria were explained during
the distribution. For an additional incentive to participate
in the survey, participants were able to enter a voluntary



raffle after completion (e.g., _one out of five 20-euro Ama-_
_zon vouchers_ ). The study size was based on the previous
studies and aimed to reach around 1000 participants
during the survey period. The ethical committee of the
German Sport University Cologne approved the study
(reference: 053/2018).


**Participants**
Participants were eligible if they lived in Germany at
the time and understood the German language in order
to reach only the German gaming scene. Other participation requirements included being 14 years old or
older and actively playing video games. The first page
of the survey showed an information sheet specifying the purpose of the study, and consent to participate
was obtained. Before the actual survey started, the participants were asked about their country of residence and
age. For participants who did not live in Germany or who
were younger than 14 years, the survey ended, and they
were excluded.


**Measures**
The questionnaire was designed to examine the dietary
behavior of video game players and esports players.
Demography, video gaming behavior, and health behavior were also included as topics. Overall, the questionnaire contained a total of 61–63 questions, depending
on the participants’ answers to the filter questions. It was
created and conducted using the online survey tool Unipark ( _Questback GmbH, Cologne, Germany_ ).
At the beginning, participants were asked about their
demographic and anthropometric data. The wording
and rating of these questions were designed in accordance with the standards of the German Federal Statistical
Office [23].
Subsequently, gaming behavior was investigated with
self-designed questions, because no appropriate and validated questionnaires were available. First, participants
had to classify their player status:


 - professional players (regularly earning significant
revenue from esports, such as prize money, sponsorships, and salaries from clubs),

 - former professionals (esports professionals who no
longer compete),

 - amateurs (playing esports, but without earning a significant amount of money),

 - regular players (playing video games or esports more
than once a week, but without taking part in official
tournaments and leagues),

 - occasional players (playing video games several times
a month or less without participating in official tournaments and leagues),


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 3 of 13


**Fig. 1** Body image scale [27]




 - non-players.


Moreover, participants should indicate their favorite
game genre (a semi-open-ended question) and their
video game playing times (hours per week). The game
time was divided into four categories:


 - alone against human opponents (player vs. player),

 - with human players together against human opponents (koop-player vs. player),

 - alone against computer-controlled opponents (player
vs. environment),

 - with human players together against computer-controlled opponents (koop-player vs. environment).


The questions on the health behaviors of the participants referred to their last four weeks. The self-rated
health was measured with the first question of the _SF-_
_36_ questionnaire [24]. The duration of moderate- to
vigorous physical activity was reported in hours per
week and sedentary time in hours per day. Furthermore, the entire version of the _WHO-Five Well-Being_
_Index_ [25] was implemented in order to assess individual well-being.
The main part was introduced with two questions
referring to the diet of the participants:




 - If they are vegan or vegetarian,

 - Which foods they avoid (multiple possible answers:
"meat, poultry, or sausage," "fish," "milk or dairy
products," "eggs").


The dietary behavior was surveyed according to the _food_
_frequency questionnaire_ of the Robert-Koch Institute [26].
It can be separated into two parts: the dietary behavior
and the drinking behavior. The questionnaire was slightly
modified. Certain foods were combined (e.g., whole grain
bread, mixed bread, and white bread as bread in general)
or excluded (e.g. consumption of jam or honey) to make
the questionnaire more time efficient.
The last part of the questionnaire consisted of the participants’ personal body image and their desired body
image. For this purpose, the body image scale of Stunkard, Sørensen, and Schulsinger (1983) was used (Fig. 1).


**Data analyses**
The data were checked for completeness, consistency,
and plausibility. Participants were excluded from all analyses if their data was inconsistent (e.g., reporting to be a
high school student with a bachelor’s degree) or implausible (e.g., incredible high amounts of foods and drinks
consumption). Participants were also excluded if they did
not complete the full survey. In the case of missing data


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 4 of 13



for individual questions, the participant was excluded
only for the corresponding parameter. For calculations,
list wise exclusion was chosen to maintain a consistent
number of subjects in the tables.
For a clearer analysis of the dietary data and more
clearly arranged tables, the player groups were grouped
into video game players and esports players. The esports
players include professionals and amateurs. All other
groups were summarized in the video game group. The
term “gamers” is used for both groups together. Furthermore, for clarity, the foods related to dietary behavior
were grouped together in the tables.
The participants’ weight and height were measured,
and their body mass index (BMI) was calculated. The
playing times of the individual game categories were
added together to obtain the total playing time. The
amount of drinking and food consumption was recorded
monthly, which corresponds to 28 days. For daily consumption, the servings were calculated down. For the
calculations of the correlations with body image, first
the difference between the desired body image and the
current body image was calculated. Based on this, the
differences were categorized from 1 = agreement to
9 = greatest difference.
Descriptive statistics were applied to all the data. For
each player status, numerical data as well as ordinal data
were described by means, standard deviations, median
and IQR. Nominal data were described by frequencies.
All data were checked for normal distribution. If a nonnormal distribution was present, statistical differences
between the groups were calculated by the Kruskal–Wallis test, Fisher’s exact test, or Mann–Whitney U-test.
Otherwise, ANOVA was performed. Post-hoc tests with
Bonferroni correction were performed if overall group
differences were statistically significant. Sign test was
used to calculate differences between the current body
image and the desired body image. To examine possible
associations, partial Spearman correlations were calculated. The resulting coefficients were interpreted according to Cohen [28] as poor (rho = 0.10–0.29), moderate
(rho = 0.30–0.49), and strong (rho > 0.50). The level of
significance for all analyses was set at p < 0.05. All statistical analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics 26
(IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).


**Results**
**Participants**
In Fig. 2, the progress toward the final sample is displayed. Accordingly, the total sample consists of 817 participants, of whom 20 are professional esports players, 15
are former professional esports players, 190 are esports
amateurs, 456 are regular players, and 136 are occasional
players (Table 1). Hence, the participants can be divided


|Overall parcipants<br>n = 1426|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||


|Completed quesonnaire<br>n = 973|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||



**Fig. 2** Flowchart to the analyzable data sets


into n = 607 video game players and n = 210 esports
players.
Table 1 displays the characteristics of the sample
regarding player status. On average, the total sample is
mostly young (24.2 ± 6.9 years), predominantly male
(87.1%), and well educated (67.5% have at least a higher
education entrance qualification). The majority of the
sample are students (39.3%) or work in full-time employment (30.6%). Pupils (11.9%) and trainees (8.4%) make
up only a small proportion. The adults of the sample
(19 years and older) have an average BMI of 25.1 ± 5.1 kg/
m [2] (n = 683), which can be classified as overweight. The
percentage of female gamers differs between video game
players (15.7%) and esports players (4.8%, p < 0.01). The
Kruskal–Wallis test showed differences in education
across groups (p = 0.04). However, according to the post
hoc test with adjusted significance, no differences were
found between the individual groups. There are no more
significant differences between the video game players
and esports players based on the sample characteristics.


**Health behavior**
Table 2 displays the data on the health behavior of the
sample. Overall, the participants reported their health
status mostly as “excellent” (16.8%), “very good” (43.9%),
or “good” (33.0%). Only the minority had a “fair” or
“poor” (6.2%) health status. On average, the sample is
physically active for 9.2 ± 8.4 h a week. In contrast, the
participants are sedentary for 7.7 ± 3.6 h a day. For the
WHO-5 questionnaire, the sample had an average score
of 59.4 ± 17.5. When it comes to playing time, the professional players play the most (36.4 ± 23.7 h/week).
In comparison between the groups, esports players
(8.25 ± 3.6 h/day) sit statistically significantly longer
than video game players (7.5 ± 3.5 h/day, p < 0.01).










Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 5 of 13


**Table 1** Sample characteristics



**Group** **Age** **[1]** **[years] Mean**
**(SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**Gender** **[2]** **[“male”] n** **BMI** **[1]** **[kg/m** **[2]** **] Mean**
**(%)** **(SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**Education** **[1]** **[“higher**
**education entrance**
**qualification or**
**higher”] n (%)**



**Employment** **[2]** **[“full-**
**time employment”]**
**n (%)**



Total sample (n = 808) 24.2 (6.9) 703 (87.0) 24.7 (5.1) 545 (67.5) 247 (30.6)

23.0 (20.0–27.0) 24.0 (21.6–26.6)

Professional players 22.8 (4.5) 19 (95.0) 24.0 (3.8) 15 (75.0) 7 (35.0)
(n 20)
= 22.0 (20.0–23.8) 23.0 (21.0–26.2)



Former professional 28.4 (7.4) 14 (93.3) 25.3 (3.8) 13 (86.7) 10 (66.7)
players (n 15)
= 27.0 (22.0–37.0) 24.8 (22.3–26.6)

Amateurs (n = 187) 24.0 (7.3) 178 [R,O] (95.2) 24.9 (4.9) 119 (63.6) 54 (28.9)



27.0 (22.0–37.0) 24.8 (22.3–26.6)



22.0 (19.0–26.0) 24.2 (21.5–27.4)



Regular players 23.9 (6.5) 392 [A,O] (86.7) 24.9 (5.5) 294 (65.0) 136 (30.1)
(n 452)
= 23.0 (20.0–27.0) 24.2 (21.6–26.6)



23.0 (20.0–27.0) 24.2 (21.6–26.6)



Occasional players 25.2 (7.6) 100 [A,R] (74.6) 24.0 (4.2) 104 (77.5) 40 (29.9)
(n 134)
= 23.0 (21.0–27.0) 23.5 (21.4–25.8)



23.0 (21.0–27.0) 23.5 (21.4–25.8)



**p** 0.06 **< 0.01** 0.32 **0.04** 0.06



1 Kruskal–Wallis test; 2Fisher’s Exact Test; 9 participants are missing, because of not specifying gender, weight or height. Superscript letters indicate statistically
significant (p < 0.05) differences to other groups in the same column: [P] professional players; [F] former professional players; [A] amateurs; [R] regular players; [O] occasional
players. Bold values shows a significance (p < 0.05)



Additionally, the esports players (8.3 ± 8.0 h/week) are
significantly less physically active than the video game
players (9.5 ± 8.5 h/week, p = 0.03). Regarding the playing time, all player categories playing statistically significant more than the occasional players (p < 0.01).
Furthermore, the amateurs (26.7 ± 14.9 h/week) play
more hours in a week than the regular players do
(21.3 ± 14.3 h/week; p < 0.01).


**Drinking behavior**
Table 3 displays the daily drinking consumption of the
participants. The main source of fluid intake for them
is water (10.9 ± 7.0 l/week). With the exception of beer
(0.9 ± 1.6 l/week), the consumption of alcoholic beverages is rather low. Overall, nearly a quarter of the participants do not drink alcohol. Among those under 18 years
old, half of them drink alcohol.
Except for energy drinks, no statistically significant differences in drinking consumption were found between
video game players and esports players. Esports players
(0.2 ± 0.6 servings/day) drink significantly more energy
drinks than the video game players (0.1 ± 0.4 servings/
day; p = 0.02).


**Dietary behavior**
Most of the participants (85.2%) do not follow a specific dietary pattern. The other participants (14.8%) are
vegetarians or vegans. Overall, nearly half of the gamers
prepare their own meals at least five times a week. No



statistically significant differences were found between
the video game players and esports players.
Table 4 displays the dietary behavior of the participants. While bread or buns are eaten every day
(1.6 ± 1.2 servings/day), other carbohydrate foods are
eaten only several times a week. There are no statistically significant differences between the groups.
The results show that both vegetables (1.7 ± 1.6
servings/day) and fruits (0.9 ± 1.0 servings/day) are
consumed almost daily. For these foods, there are no
significant differences between the groups.
To have a better idea of the serving amounts, animalbased products are given in servings per month here.
It shows that the esports players (16.4 ± 18.5 servings/
month) eat more red meat than the video game players (13.4 ± 15.6 servings/month; p = 0.02). Additionally,
esports players consume 12.8 ± 16.6 servings of poultry
a month, while video game players eat 9.7 ± 13.7 servings a month (p < 0.01). In contrast, video game players
consume statistically significantly more dairy products
and cheese than esports players.
The esports players (9.1 ± 11.6 servings/month) consume statistically significantly more fast food than
the video game players (7.0 ± 10.0 servings/month;
p < 0.01). However, the video game players (18.2 ± 26.5
servings/month) eat statistically significantly more
sweets than the esports players (14.1 ± 22.0 servings/
month; p < 0.01). The same applies to sweet bakery
products.


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 6 of 13


**Table 2** Data on health behavior of the sample



**Group** **Health ­Status** **[1]** **[Mode]**
**n (%) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**Physical ­Activity** **[1]**

**[hours/week] Mean**
**(SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**Sedentary ­time** **[1]**

**[hours/day] Mean**
**(SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**WHO-5 ­Score** **[1]**

**[1–100] Mean (SD)**
**Median (P25–P75)**



**Playing time [hours/**
**week] Mean (SD)**
**Median (P25–P75)**



Total sample (n = 800) “very good” 352 (43.9) 9.2 (8.4) 7.7 (3.6) 59.4 (17.5) 20.3 (15.6) [O]

4.0 (3.0–4.0) 7.0 (4.0–10.0) 8.0 (5.0–10.0) 60.0 (48.0–72.0) 17.0 (0.9–27.0)



Professional players “very good” 10 (50.0) 7.0 (5.6) 7.9 (4.1) 69.2 (9.6) 36.4 (23.7)
(n 20)
= 3.0 (3.3–4.8) 5.5 (4.0–9.5) 8.0 (4.3–11.5) 68.0 (64.0–72.0)



3.0 (3.3–4.8) 5.5 (4.0–9.5) 8.0 (4.3–11.5) 68.0 (64.0–72.0) 33.5 (19.3–48.5)



Former professional “very good” & “good” 6 9.8 (6.3) 8.5 (3.5) 64.5 (8.0) 23.0 (16.7) [O]
players (n = 15) (40.0)



4.0 (3.0–4.0) 8.0 (5.0–12.0) 8.0 (5.0–12.0) 64.0 (56.0–72.0) 18.0 (11.0–40.0)



Amateurs (n = 187) “very good” 80 (42.8) 8.4 (8.2) [O] 8.3 (3.6) [O] 60.8 (16.6) 26.7 (14.9) [O,R]

4.0 (3.0–4.0) 6.0 (3.0–10.0) 9.0 (6.0–10.0) 64.0 (52.0–72.0) 23.0 (16.0–35.0)



Amateurs (n = 187) “very good” 80 (42.8) 8.4 (8.2) [O] 8.3 (3.6) [O] 60.8 (16.6) 26.7 (14.9) [O,R]

4.0 (3.0–4.0) 6.0 (3.0–10.0) 9.0 (6.0–10.0) 64.0 (52.0–72.0) 23.0 (16.0–35.0)

Regular players “very good” 197 (44.1) 9.3 (8.8) 7.8 (3.7) [O] 58.7 (17.8) 21.3 (14.3) [O,A]
(n 445)
= 4.0 (3.0–4.0) 7.0 (4.0–10.0) 8.0 (5.0–10.0) 60.0 (48.0–72.0) 18.0 (11.0–26.5)

Occasional players “very good” 59 (44.4) 10.2 (7.6) [A] 6.5 (2.8) [R,A] 57.8 (18.8) 5.1 (5.6) [P,F,A,R]
(n 133)
= 4.0 (3.0–4.0) 8.0 (5.0–14.0) 6.0 (4.0–8.0) 60.0 (48.0–72.0) 3.5 (2.0–7.0)



4.0 (3.0–4.0) 7.0 (4.0–10.0) 8.0 (5.0–10.0) 60.0 (48.0–72.0) 18.0 (11.0–26.5)



4.0 (3.0–4.0) 8.0 (5.0–14.0) 6.0 (4.0–8.0) 60.0 (48.0–72.0) 3.5 (2.0–7.0)



**p** 0.55 **0.03** **< 0.01** 0.05 **< 0.01**



1 Kruskal–Wallis test; 17 Participants missing, because of not specifying physical activity, sedentary time. Superscript letters indicate statistically significant (p < 0.05)
differences to other groups in the same column: [P] professional players; [F] former professional players; [A] amateurs; [R] regular players; [O] occasional players. Bold values
shows a significance (p < 0.05)



**Body image**
Table 5 displays the desired and current body image of
the participants. Due to low number of the participants
with diverse genders (n = 9), they were not considered
in the following section. On average, women indicated
a 3.0 ± 0.9 (n = 105) for their desired body image (see
Fig. 1) and a 4.0 ± 1.4 for their current body image. On
the other hand, the male participants desired a body
image of 3.9 ± 0.9 (n = 695) and had a current body image
of 4.3 ± 1.5. Accordingly, the body image of the female
participants deviates on average by 1.0 ± 1.1 points and
for the men by 0.5 ± 1.2 points, whereby in each case the
leaner body image was desired. Accordingly, there are
significant differences between the gender in the deviations of the desired body image and the current body
image (p < 0.01). But there are also significant differences
between the current body image and desired body image
within both male and female participants (p < 0.01).
There are no significant differences between video
game players and esports players (p = 0.56). Even if the
groups are divided by gender, there are no significant differences between them (male: p = 0.64; female: p = 0.09).


**Associations with health status and video game playing**
**time**
Table 6 displays significant partial spearman correlations
with health status as well as video game playing time and
health behaviors, drinks, and nutrition. Several poor to
moderate correlations were found. Although parameters



such as video game playing time and beverages, with the
exception of energy drinks, show significant associations,
the correlations are too weak to be relevant. Foods and
beverages not included in the table have no significant
correlation with the health status.
The findings show a positive but weak relationship between playing time and sedentary time per day
(rho = 0.23; p < 0.01). There are also poor positive correlations between playing time and energy drinks (rho = 0.14;
p < 0.01) as well as fast food (rho = 0.13; p < 0.01). Apart
from the correlations shown in the table, there are no
other statistically significant correlations.


**Correlations with the body image**
Table 7 shows correlations between the differences in
body image and parameters of the health behaviors.
There is a moderately negative correlation between
the difference of the desired and current body image
and health status (p < 0.01; rho = −0.35). Correlations
between the difference in participants’ current and
desired body image and their dietary behavior were not
calculated due to a lack of significance.


**Discussion**
**Key results**
The aim of the eSports Study 2021 was to investigate the
health and dietary behavior of video game players and
esports players in Germany. Data from over 800 mostly
male, young, and well-educated participants show that
self-reported health is generally good. While the players


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 7 of 13


**Table 3** Drinking consumption of the participants in servings a day

**Drinking consumption** **Total sample (n** = **807) Mean** **Esports players (n** = **207) Mean** **Video game players (n** = **600)** **p** **[1]**

**[servings/day]** **(SD) Median (P25-P75)** **(SD) Median (P25-P75)** **Mean (SD) Median (P25-P75)**


Water [a] 7.8 (5.0) 8.0 (5.3) 7.7 (4.8) 0.77

8.0 (4.0–10.0) 8.0 (3.0–10.0) 7.0 (4.0–10.0)

Juice [a] 0.7 (1.3) 0.8 (1.5) 0.7 (1.3) 0.83

0.2 (< 0.1–0.6) 0.2 (0.0–0.8) 0.2 (< 0.1–0.6)

Soft ­drinks [a] 0.9 (1.8) 1.0 (1.9) 0.8 (1.8) 0.73

0.2 (< 0.1–0.9) 0.2 (< 0.1–1.0) 0.2 (< 0.1–0.7)

Energy ­drinks [b] 0.2 (0.5) 0.2 (0.6) 0.1 (0.4) **0.02**

0.0 (0.0–0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.2) 0.0 (0.0–0.1)

Light-softdrinks [a] 0.4 (1.2) 0.4 (1.2) 0.4 (1.3) 0.49

0.0 (0.0–0.2) 0.0 (0.0–0.2) 0.0 (0.0–0.2)

Coffee [c] 0.9 (1.4) 0.9 (1.5) 0.9 (1.4) 0.74

0.1 (0.0–1.6) 0.1 (0.0–1.6) 0.1 (0.0–1.6)

Tea [c] 0.5 (1.2) 0.5 (1.1) 0.5 (1.2) 0.93

< 0.1 (0.0–0.4) < 0.01 (0.0–0.4) < 0.1 (0.0–0.4)

Beer [e] 0.4 (0.7) 0.4 (0.8) 0.5 (0.7) 0.11

0.2 (0.0–0.5) 0.1 (0.0–0.4) 0.2 (0.0–0.6)

Wine [d] 0.1 (0.2) < 0.1 (0.1) 0.1 (0.2) 0.08

0.0 (0.0– < 0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.0) 0.0 (0.0– < 0.1)

Mixed alcoholic ­drinks [a] 0.1 (0.3) 0.1 (0.3) 0.1 (0.3) 0.53

0.0 (0.0–0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.1)

Spirits [f] 0.1 (0.3) 0.1 (0.3) 0.1 (0.2) 0.71

0.0 (0.0–0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.1)

Other alcoholic ­drinks [a] < 0.1 (0.2) < 0.1 (0.2) < 0.1 (0.2) 0.13

0.0 (0.0–0.0) 0.0 (0.0–0.0) 0.0 (0.0–0.0)

Other alcoholic free ­drinks [a] 0.4 (1.7) 0.6 (2.2) 0.4 (1.6) 0.16

0.0 (0.0– < 0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.0) 0.0 (0.0–0.1)

1cserving Mann–Whitney U test; 10 Participants missing, because of not specifying at least one information for the drinks; = 150 ml, dserving = 125 ml, eserving = 330 ml, fserving = 20 ml. Bold values shows a significance (p < 0.05)aserving = 200 ml, bserving = 250 ml,



have relatively high sitting times, the majority are also
physically active. Nevertheless, adults are slightly overweight on average. Dietary behavior shows no major
abnormalities compared to the general German population, except for the energy drinks. The high consumption
poses a health risk due to the high sugar content, among
other things. Overall, the participants are mostly satisfied
with their body image.


**Demography and health behavior**
As shown in previous studies, gamers in Germany are
predominantly male, young, and well-educated [21, 22].
The vast majority of participants are students or have
full-time jobs. Besides, they pursue their hobby of gaming, which, due to its nature, is played mostly while they
sit. In comparison to other studies, the participants
in this study played nearly the same amount of video
games, approximately 20 h per week [4]. The high playing times of the professionals (36 h per week) are probably related to the fact that they earn their living with



the video games and therefore have to invest more time
in them. Due to the overall high playing times, the players have high sitting times, which are, however, comparable to the German population [29, 30]. Nevertheless,
even though there is currently no evidence to recommend exact sitting times, these should be reduced [31].
The body mass index of the adult participants can be
classified as overweight, but it is also comparable to the
German population, which has an BMI of 26.0 kg/m [2]

[32]. In this respect, studies have already shown that
gaming is not related to an increased BMI [33]. As in
previous studies, the majority of gamers (85.3%) exceed
the WHO’s recommendations of 2.5 h a week of moderate to vigorous physical activity. In Germany an average
of 42.6% of female and 48.0% of male people reach the
WHO recommendations. [34]. Therefore, a larger proportion reaches the recommendations than the German population. However, the sample of the present
study is younger than the normal population, and physical activity often decreases with age [35]. Moreover,


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 8 of 13


**Table 4** Dietary behavior of the participants in servings a day

**Dietary behavior[servings/day]** **Total sample (n** = **807) Mean** **Esports players (n** = **210)** **Video game players (n** = **597)** **p** **[1]**
**(SD) Median (P25–P75)** **Mean (SD) Median (P25–P75)** **Mean (SD) Median (P25–P75)**


Bread/Buns [a] 1.6 (1.2) 1.6 (1.1) 1.6 (1.3) 0.83

1.5 (0.5–2.0) 1.6 (0.6–2.0) 1.5 (0.5–2.0)

Pasta [b] 0.5 (0.6) 0.6 (0.6) 0.5 (0.6) 0.37

0.4 (0.2–0.6) 0.4 (0.2–0.7) 0.4 (0.2–0.6)

Rice [c] 0.4 (0.5) 0.5 (0.6) 0.4 (0.5) 0.15

0.2 (0.1–0.4) 0.2 (0.1–0.4) 0.2 (0.1–0.4)

Cereals [d] 0.3 (0.6) 0.3 (0.6) 0.3 (0.6) 0.06

< 0.1 (0.0–0.4) 0.0 (0.0–0.3) 0.1 (0.0–0.4)

Cornflakes [d] 0.0 (0.4) 0.2 (0.5) 0.1 (0.4) 1.0

0.0 (0.0–0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.1) 0.0 (0.0–0.1)

Fruits [e] 0.9 (1.0) 0.9 (1.0) 1.0 (1.1) 0.10

5.0 (0.2–1.1) 0.5 (0.2–1.0) 0.5 (0.2–1.5)

Vegetables [e] 1.7 (1.6) 1.6 (1.3) 1.7 (1.7) 0.52

1.5 (0.5–2.4) 1.5 (0.5–2.1) 1.5 (0.5–2.4)

Potatoes [e] 0.6 (0.8) 0.6 (0.9) 0.6 (0.7) 0.42

0.4 (0.2–0.6) 0.4 (0.2–0.9) 0.4 (0.2–0.6)

Nuts [f] 0.2 (0.4) 0.2 (0.4) 0.2 (0.4) 0.64

0.1 (0.0–0.3) 0.1 (0.0–0.2) 0.1 (0.0–0.3)

Red ­meat [g] 0.5 (0.6) 0.6 (0.7) 0.5 (0.5) **0.02**

0.2 (0.1–0.6) 0.4 (0.2–0.8) 0.2 (0.1–0.5)

Poultry [g] 0.4 (0.5) 0.5 (0.6) 0.3 (0.5) **< 0.01**

0.2 (0.1–0.4) 0.2 (0.1–0.5) 0.2 (0.1–0.4)

Fish [g] 0.1 (0.2) 0.2 (0.3) 0.1 (0.2) 0.08

0.1 (0.0–0.2) 0.1 (0.0–0.2) 0.1 (0.1–0.8)

Sausage [h] 1.0 (1.4) 1.1 (1.5) 1.0 (1.4) 0.35

0.4 (0.0–1.5) 0.4 (0.0–1.6) 0.4 (0.0–1.5)

Cheese [h] 0.8 (1.0) 0.7 (1.2) 0.8 (1.0) **0.03**

0.4 (< 0.1–1.0) 0.4 (0.0–1.0) 0.4 (0.1–1.0)

Dairy ­produtcs [j] 0.5 (0.8) 0.4 (0.6) 0.6 (0.9) **< 0.01**

0.2 (< 0.1–0.6) 0.2 (0.0–0.5) 0.2 (0.1–0.8)

Fast ­food [k] 0.3 (0.4) 0.3 (0.4) 0.2 (0.4) **< 0.01**

0.2 (0.1–0.3) 0.2 (0.1–0.4) 0.2 (0.1–0.3)

Sweet bakery ­products [l] 0.2 (0.3) 0.2 (0.3) 0.2 (0.3) **< 0.01**

0.1 (0.0–0.2) 0.1 (0.0–0.2) 0.1 (< 0.1–0.2)

Chips & savory ­snacks [m] 0.2 (0.4) 0.2 (0.5) 0.2 (0.3) 0.10

0.1 (0.0–0.2) 0.1 (0.0–0.2) 0.1 (0.0–0.2)

Sweets [n] 0.6 (0.8) 0.5 (0.8) 0.6 (0.9) **< 0.01**

0.3 (0.1–0.9) 0.2 (< 0.1–0.5) 0.3 (0.1–1.0)

1 Mann–Whitney U test; 10 participants missing, because of not specifying at least one information of the foods; aserving = slice/bun, bserving = one plate (100 g
raw/200 g cooked), jserving = cup (150 g), [c] serving kserving = small cup (50 g raw), = dish, lserving = piece, [d] serving mserving = small bowl (150 g), = small bowl (125 g), [e] serving nserving = fist sized piece, = candy bar (25 g). Bold values shows a significance (p < 0.05) [f] serving = handful, [g] serving = filet, [h] serving = slice,



these are only the minimum recommendations [36].
For additional health benefits, more than 300 min of
moderate physical activity and two muscle-strengthening activities per week are necessary. The results cannot provide any information on this because the type
of physical activity was not surveyed. According to the



data, the stereotype of the sedentary and physically
inactive gamer cannot be supported.
Esports players reported a quiet, positive general health
status. But there are significant differences between the
desired and actual body image. However, on average this
only differs in a maximum of one point, so for the most


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 9 of 13


**Table 5** The desired and current body image of the participants


**Male** **Female**



**Desired body image**
**Mean (SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**Current body image**
**Mean (SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**Desired body image**
**Mean (SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



**Current body image**
**Mean (SD) Median (P25–**
**P75)**



Total sample
(Male: n = 695)
(Female: n = 105)



Video game players
(Male: n = 502)
(Female: n = 95)



3.9 (0.9) 4.3 (1.5) 3.0 (0.9) 4.0 (1.4)
4.0 (3.0–4.0) 4.0 (3.0–5.0) 3.0 (2.0–4.0) 4.0 (3.0–5.0)


3.8 (0.9) 4.3 (1.5) 3.0 (1.0) 4.0 (1.5)
4.0 (3.0–4.0) 4.0 (3.0–5.0) 3.0 (2.0–3.0) 4.0 (3.0–5.0)


4.0 (0.8) 4.5 (1.6) 3.3 (0.7) 3.8 (0.8)
4.0 (4.0–5.0) 4.0 (3.5–5.5) 3.0 (3.0–4.0) 4.0 (3.8–4.0)



Esports players
(Male: n = 193)
(Female: n = 10)



p **< 0.01** **< 0.01**



Sign test. n = 800 due to missing data. Bold values shows a significance (p < 0.05)


**Table 6** Correlations with health status and video game playing
time


**Health status** **Video game**
**playing time**


**rho** **p** **rho** **p**


Well-being score **0.42** **< 0.01** - 0.02 0.61

Physical activity **0.31** **< 0.01** - 0.02 0.63

Sedentary time **0.21** **< 0.01;** **0.23** **< 0.01**

Health status - 0.09 0.01

BMI - **0.31** **< 0.01** 0.05 0.13



**Table 7** Correlations with body image



**Body image**



Well-being score **p < 0.01; rho =** **−0.24**

Physical activity **p < 0.01; rho =** **−0.13**



Sedentary time **p < 0.01; rho = 0.16**

BMI **p < 0.01; rho = 0.33**

Video game playing time **p < 0.01; rho = 0.11**



Video game playing time - 0.08 0.02



Water 0.08 0.03 - 0.07 0.04

Soft drinks - 0.08 0.03 **0.15** **< 0.01**

Energy drinks - **0.11** **< 0.01** **0.14** **< 0.01**

Light soft drinks - 0.09 0.01 - 0.03 0.45

Coffee 0.62 0.02 - **0.13** **< 0.01**

Beer 0.04 0.23 - **0.12** **< 0.01**

Wine 0.09 0.01 - **0.16** **< 0.01**

Mixed alcoholic drinks 0.08 0.04 - **0.10** **< 0.01**

Fruits **0.19** **< 0.01** - **0.14** **< 0.01**

Vegetables **0.14** **< 0.01** - **0.10** **< 0.01**

Cereals **0.12** **< 0.01** - **0.15** **< 0.01**

Cornflakes 0.05 0.17 **0.12** **< 0.01**

Fish **0.11** **< 0.01** - 0.01 0.71

Dairy products 0.09 < 0.01 - **0.14** **< 0.01**

Cheese - 0.04 0.28 - 0.09 0.02

Nuts **0.10** **< 0.01** - **0.10** **< 0.01**

Fast food - **0.12** **< 0.01** **0.13** **< 0.01**

Red meat 0.01 0.88 0.09 < 0.01

Poultry - 0.01 0.83 **0.11** **< 0.01**

Sausage - 0.08 0.03 0.08 0.02

Sweet bakery products 0.04 0.25 - **0.12** **< 0.01**



Health status **p < 0.01; rho =** **−0.35**

Partial spearman correlations. n = 794 due to missing data in the included
parameters. Bold lines show at least a significant weak correlation


part they seem to be satisfied with their body image.
Being satisfied with the own body is very important for
well-being and overall health [37]. Regarding the WHO5, the majority also show good psychological well-being.
On average, the scores of the participants were above
50, which is considered the cut-off score, for precarious
well-being [38]. Compared to amateur and professional
athletes in traditional sports, the esports players showed
similar scores [39]. However, it is a serious matter that
almost a quarter of the participants were below the cutoff score and thus further psychological diagnostic procedures should be performed with regard to depression.
Compared to previous studies, the well-being of video
game and esports players decreased [21, 22]. One reason for the decreasing well-being could be the COVID19 pandemic that occurred at the time of data collection.
As some studies have shown, there has been a general
decline in mental health and well-being in the population [40, 41]. Accordingly, future research should look
more closely at the well-being of video game players and
esports players.



Partial spearman correlations. n = 789 due to missing data in the included
parameters. Bold lines show at least a significant weak correlation


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 10 of 13



**Drinking behavior**
With 1.6 L per day, water is the main source of fluid for
the participants. This is above the general recommendations of the German Nutrition Society (DGE), which
recommends 1.5 L per day [42]. The majority (91.3%)
achieves the recommendation of 1.5 L a day. This puts
them on par with 11–17 year-olds living in Germany, who
drink 1.4 L per day [43]. However, the individual water
intake depends on factors such as physical composition
and activity during the day. Accordingly, 1.5 L is the minimum recommendation. Depending on age, weight, and
physical activity, more water should be drunk [44].
Although it is recommended that water should be used
to meet the liquid requirement, other beverages can
also be consumed. Very popular in this context are soft
drinks. Compared to the 14–17 year olds, who drink an
average of almost half a liter of soft drinks per day, the
participants in this study drink clearly less [45]. If adding the juice consumption, which contain nearly as
much sugar as the soft drinks, the participants consume
only half as many soft drinks and juice as the German
11–17 year olds, who drink about 573 ml per day [43].
Older age groups also consume more of these beverages.
For example, men aged 18–29 drink an average of 4.5
glasses of juice and soft drinks per day [46]. Nevertheless, the consumption of gamers at one serving per day is
already too high and should be decreased. The high sugar
content of these drinks can lead to an increased risk of
diabetes, weight gain, and high blood pressure [19, 47].
Similar reasoning applies to energy drinks. On average, participants drink more than one can per week.
Compared to the German population, in which only just
under 10% drink a can at least once a week, the players
in this study drink much more energy drinks [48]. In
comparison to the other groups, esports players drink
significantly more. This could be related to the prevalent
sponsorships in esports. Energy drinks are also advertised in a way to provide health benefits [49], especially
for increasing performance and concentration, which
are particularly relevant in esports. However, besides the
high amount of sugar, energy drinks have further health
risks. According to this, insomnia, stress, depressive
mood, and gastrointestinal upset could be observed with
regular consumption [50]. Nevertheless, an overall reduction of sugary beverages is to be strived for, because these
are associated with obesity and diseases such as diabetes

[14, 15, 51]. The association between energy drinks and
health status in this study strengthens the explanation.
Because the number of studies that investigated the
consumption of energy drinks in traditional sports is
limited, it is difficult to draw a comparison with them.
Nonetheless, one study [52] looked at energy drink consumption in young athletes as young as 14 years old.



Seventeen percent of them drank energy drinks daily or
one to two times a week. While the authors could not
show a correlation with time spent exercising, another
study showed that people who exercise more in their leisure time also consume more energy drinks [53]. However, the values are also hardly comparable with the
present study.
In contrast, the consumption of alcoholic beverages
among video game players and esports players is low.
About a quarter of the participants do not drink alcohol
at all. Compared to the per capita consumption per year
of the German population, gamers drink less. Beer alone
is already drunk by the German population about 0.2 l
per day [54]. In context, according to the German Nutrition Society, the tolerable amount of alcohol for healthy
men is 20 g per day [42]. This corresponds to about half a
liter of beer or 250 ml of wine. The average consumption
of both the total sample and the groups of video game
players and esports players are below this limit.


**Dietary behavior**
In terms of diet, gamers are very similar to the German
population, with one-tenth following a vegetarian or
vegan diet [55]. In contrast, the participants, with more
than six servings a week, eat relatively much meat. In
addition, they eat a slice of sausage on average every day.
The German Nutrition Society recommends only 300–
600 g of meat per week, which is equivalent to two to
four servings [42]. Eating too much meat and sausage is
associated with a higher risk of colorectal cancer [42, 56].
Fish should be eaten once a week because of its omega-3fatty acids [57]. With just under one meal per week, the
participants achieve this recommendation.
Dairy products are necessary to ensure adequate calcium intake. Gamers, on the other hand, consume less
than the recommended amount of 200–250 g milk and
two slices of cheese. Overall, the diet is largely carbohydrate-heavy. Several slices of bread, rice, pasta and
potatoes are consumed almost daily. Due to the positive
effects on the gut, it is recommended to consume whole
grain products made from it [58]. In addition, whole
grain products are associated with a lower incidence of
cardiovascular disease [18], cancer [59], and type 2 diabetes [60]. However, this study did not ask about the
quality of carbohydrates. Accordingly, no statement can
be made about the type of consumed carbohydrates. For
a balanced diet, vegetables and fruits are also necessary.
They are an important source of vitamins, minerals, trace
elements, and fiber [61]. The German Nutrition Society recommends “five a day,” which means that at least
three servings of vegetables and two servings of fruits
should be eaten every day [42, 62]. One serving of nuts
or one glass of juice can replace one serving of fruit [62].


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 11 of 13



According to the results, only a small percentage of 16%
achieves these recommendations. The video game players reach them significantly more often than the esports
players do. Compared to the German population gamers perform minimally better. In Germany, only 15%
of women and 7% of men reach recommendations for
fruits and vegetables [61]. Nevertheless, there is an overall lack of vegetable and fruit consumption. Especially
with regard to the prevention of chronic diseases such as
stroke, heart disease, and hypertension, attention should
be paid to increasing vegetable and fruit consumption

[63, 64].
Even if the consumption of sweets and chips is quite
low, the participants like to resort to quick meals such as
fast food. Almost two meals per week consist of it. Due
to the negative association with subjective health in this
study, fast food consumption should be limited. Even
though it is best to consume less, the amount compared
to 12–17 year old Germans is similar. They consume
about 400–600 g of fast food per week [65]. These results
are also reflected in the cooking frequency of the participants. Nearly half of the participants cook for themselves
five times a week. This is close to the 14–29 year old German population, in which half cook almost every day

[55]. However, considering that participants were forced
to cook for themselves during the COVID-19 pandemic
due to lockdowns, this is only a small proportion of those
who actually cook regularly.


**Limitations**
This study also has some limitations. First, because the
current study is based solely on self-reported data, the
results may be influenced by social desirability or subjective over- and underestimation of certain behaviors such
as sedentary times, physical activity, or food and drink
consumption [66] Especially when specifying the amount
of nutrition, it might be difficult to remember exactly
or to estimate the servings correctly. To minimize these
effects, the data were checked for paradoxical entries or
extreme values. However, the effects of social desirability
and inaccurate reporting cannot be ruled out in general.
Secondly, the COVID-19 pandemic and the accompanying security measures had a significant impact on the
population and therefore possibly also on dietary behavior. On the one hand, restaurants were closed during
the lockdown, which meant that people were increasingly forced to cook for themselves. In addition, sports in
clubs or studios were limited, which affected the sports
opportunities and therefore possibly the physical activity. On the other hand, digital media got a boost, which
increased screen time and, in particular, video game playing time.



Thirdly, questions about the characteristics of video
gamers (like playing time, sitting time, physical activity,
etc.) have been largely self-generated. Either there are
no validated questionnaires on this yet or the processing time should be kept as short as possible to reduce the
dropout rate. This could have led to inaccurate data. For
example, the question on physical activity is based on a
simple indication in minutes and hours. For more valid
results in future, questionnaires like the IPAQ short form
or EHIS-PAQ should be used. Overestimation, misreporting, or the effect of social desirability cannot be ruled
out. Accordingly, the high proportion of physical activity compared to other population groups is questionable.
Insofar as length and processing time allow, validated
questionnaires should be used. The food frequency questionnaire was also slightly adapted, and some foods were
combined into one. While portion sizes were included
with all foods, everyone could subjectively perceive them
differently. However, the results still provide a good overview of the approximate dietary behavior of video game
players and esports players.


**Conclusions**
Overall, video game players and esports players reported
good general health and well-being, as well as some
healthy habits. The gamers seem to eat very similarly to
the German population. Nevertheless, there is a need for
overall improvement overall. Energy drinks, in particular,
can have a negative impact on health and lead to obesity
or diseases such as diabetes in the long run. Among other
things, sponsors in the industry are responsible for the
high consumption. These sponsorships should be critically scrutinized for the possible health consequences of
their products. In addition to limiting energy drinks and
fast food, the positive effects of fruits and vegetables on
health and performance should be highlighted. To keep
the target group healthy, they should receive sufficient
support and education in nutrition as early as possible.


**Abbreviations**
BMI Body mass index
e.g. For example
WHO World Health Organization


**Acknowledgements**
Not applicable.


**Author contributions**
MS was involved in the conception and design of the study, collected data,
performed data analysis, and wrote the manuscript. PB was involved in the
conception and design of the study, acquisition of the participants, and the
critical review of the manuscript. CT participated in the conception and
design of the study and the critical review of the manuscript. IF participated in
the conception and design of the study and critical review of the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 12 of 13



**Funding**
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. The study was
conducted as part of a third-party funded project, financially supported by the
health insurance company AOK Rhineland/Hamburg.


**Availability of data and materials**
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from
the corresponding author on reasonable request.


**Declarations**


**Ethics approval and consent to participate**
The ethical committee of the German Sport University Cologne approved the
study (reference: 053/2018).


**Consent for publication**
Not applicable.


**Competing interests**
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.


Received: 21 December 2022  Accepted: 31 March 2023


**References**
1. [newzoo. Global Games Market Report. 2022. https://​resou​rces.​newzoo.​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/Games/2022_Newzoo_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202022&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=220823342&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-8kCOE7wED-vsAB-xUzH1kmlYDDGxQstNJcylQ6qEYsOUqCBNjLnirnuGJTqOUI_7WkzM6cjVXP2TtPbrbouJnaGv0n7A&utm_content=220823342&utm_source=hs_automation)
[com/​hubfs/​Repor​ts/​Games/​2022_​Newzoo_​Free_​Global_​Games_​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/Games/2022_Newzoo_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202022&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=220823342&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-8kCOE7wED-vsAB-xUzH1kmlYDDGxQstNJcylQ6qEYsOUqCBNjLnirnuGJTqOUI_7WkzM6cjVXP2TtPbrbouJnaGv0n7A&utm_content=220823342&utm_source=hs_automation)
[Market_​Report.​pdf?​utm_​campa​ign=​GGMR%​20202​2&​utm_​medium=​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/Games/2022_Newzoo_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202022&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=220823342&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-8kCOE7wED-vsAB-xUzH1kmlYDDGxQstNJcylQ6qEYsOUqCBNjLnirnuGJTqOUI_7WkzM6cjVXP2TtPbrbouJnaGv0n7A&utm_content=220823342&utm_source=hs_automation)
[email​&_​hsmi=​22082​3342&_​hsenc=​p2ANq​tz-​8kCOE​7wED-​vsAB-​xUzH1​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/Games/2022_Newzoo_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202022&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=220823342&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-8kCOE7wED-vsAB-xUzH1kmlYDDGxQstNJcylQ6qEYsOUqCBNjLnirnuGJTqOUI_7WkzM6cjVXP2TtPbrbouJnaGv0n7A&utm_content=220823342&utm_source=hs_automation)
[kmlYD​DGxQs​tNJcy​lQ6qE​YsOUq​CBNjL​nirnu​GJTqO​UI_​7WkzM​6cjVX​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/Games/2022_Newzoo_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202022&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=220823342&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-8kCOE7wED-vsAB-xUzH1kmlYDDGxQstNJcylQ6qEYsOUqCBNjLnirnuGJTqOUI_7WkzM6cjVXP2TtPbrbouJnaGv0n7A&utm_content=220823342&utm_source=hs_automation)
[P2TtP​brbou​JnaGv​0n7A&​utm_​conte​nt=​22082​3342&​utm_​source=​hs_​](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/Games/2022_Newzoo_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202022&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=220823342&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-8kCOE7wED-vsAB-xUzH1kmlYDDGxQstNJcylQ6qEYsOUqCBNjLnirnuGJTqOUI_7WkzM6cjVXP2TtPbrbouJnaGv0n7A&utm_content=220823342&utm_source=hs_automation)
[autom​ation. Accessed 9 Nov 2022.](https://resources.newzoo.com/hubfs/Reports/Games/2022_Newzoo_Free_Global_Games_Market_Report.pdf?utm_campaign=GGMR%202022&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=220823342&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-8kCOE7wED-vsAB-xUzH1kmlYDDGxQstNJcylQ6qEYsOUqCBNjLnirnuGJTqOUI_7WkzM6cjVXP2TtPbrbouJnaGv0n7A&utm_content=220823342&utm_source=hs_automation)
2. Spitzer M. Mediennutzung in Zeiten von Corona. Nervenheilkunde.
[2020;39:698–703. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1055/a-​1193-​8248.](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-1193-8248)
3. Reitman JG, Anderson-Coto MJ, Wu M, Lee JS, Steinkuehler C. Esports
[research: a literature review. Games Cult. 2020;15:32–50. https://​doi.​](https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412019840892)
[org/​10.​1177/​15554​12019​840892.](https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412019840892)
4. DiFrancisco-Donoghue J, Balentine J, Schmidt G, Zwibel H. Managing
the health of the eSport athlete: an integrated health management
[model. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med. 2019;5:e000467. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467)
[1136/​bmjsem-​2018-​000467.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjsem-2018-000467)
5. Bayrakdar A, Yıldız Y, Bayraktar I. Do e-athletes move? A study on
physical activity level and body composition in elite e-sports. PES.
[2020;24:259–64. https://​doi.​org/​10.​15561/​20755​279.​2020.​0501.](https://doi.org/10.15561/20755279.2020.0501)
6. Trotter MG, Coulter TJ, Davis PA, Poulus DR, Polman R. The association
between esports participation, health and physical activity behaviour.
[Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijerp​](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17197329)
[h1719​7329.](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17197329)
7. Tholl C, Bickmann P, Wechsler K, Froböse I, Grieben C. Musculoskeletal
disorders in video gamers—a systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet
[Disord. 2022;23:678. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12891-​022-​05614-0.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-022-05614-0)
8. Bailey DP, Hewson DJ, Champion RB, Sayegh SM. Sitting time and risk
of cardiovascular disease and diabetes: a systematic review and meta[analysis. Am J Prev Med. 2019;57:408–16. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2019.04.015)
[amepre.​2019.​04.​015.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2019.04.015)
9. Biswas A, Oh PI, Faulkner GE, Bajaj RR, Silver MA, Mitchell MS, Alter
DA. Sedentary time and its association with risk for disease incidence,
mortality, and hospitalization in adults: a systematic review and meta[analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:123–32. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7326/​](https://doi.org/10.7326/M14-1651)
[M14-​1651.](https://doi.org/10.7326/M14-1651)
10. Patterson R, McNamara E, Tainio M, de Sá TH, Smith AD, Sharp SJ, et al.
Sedentary behaviour and risk of all-cause, cardiovascular and cancer
mortality, and incident type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and dose
[response meta-analysis. Eur J Epidemiol. 2018;33:811–29. https://​doi.​org/​](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-018-0380-1)
[10.​1007/​s10654-​018-​0380-1.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-018-0380-1)



11. Chau JY, Grunseit AC, Chey T, Stamatakis E, Brown WJ, Matthews CE, et al.
Daily sitting time and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis. PLoS ONE.
[2013;8:e80000. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00800​00.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080000)
12. Rezende LFM, Sá TH, Mielke GI, Viscondi JYK, Rey-López JP, Garcia LMT.
All-cause mortality attributable to sitting time: analysis of 54 countries
[worldwide. Am J Prev Med. 2016;51:253–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2016.01.022)
[amepre.​2016.​01.​022.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2016.01.022)
13. Park JH, Moon JH, Kim HJ, Kong MH, Oh YH. Sedentary lifestyle: overview
of updated evidence of potential health risks. Korean J Fam Med.
[2020;41:365–73. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4082/​kjfm.​20.​0165.](https://doi.org/10.4082/kjfm.20.0165)
14. Alsunni AA. Energy drink consumption: beneficial and adverse health
effects. Int J Health Sci. 2015;9:468–74.
15. Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar-sweetened beverages and
weight gain in children and adults: a systematic review and meta-anal[ysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;98:1084–102. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3945/​ajcn.​113.​](https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.058362)
[058362.](https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.058362)
16. Jaworowska A, Blackham T, Davies IG, Stevenson L. Nutritional challenges
and health implications of takeaway and fast food. Nutr Rev. 2013;71:310–
[8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​nure.​12031.](https://doi.org/10.1111/nure.12031)
17. Shalitin S, Giannini C. Obesity, metabolic syndrome, and nutrition. World
[Rev Nutr Diet. 2022;125:41–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1159/​00052​1773.](https://doi.org/10.1159/000521773)
18. Bechthold A, Boeing H, Schwedhelm C, Hoffmann G, Knüppel S, Iqbal K,
et al. Food groups and risk of coronary heart disease, stroke and heart failure: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective
[studies. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2019;59:1071–90. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​](https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2017.1392288)
[10408​398.​2017.​13922​88.](https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2017.1392288)
19. Vartanian LR, Schwartz MB, Brownell KD. Effects of soft drink consumption on nutrition and health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am
[J Public Health. 2007;97:667–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2105/​AJPH.​2005.​](https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2005.083782)
[083782.](https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2005.083782)
20. Schwingshackl L, Hoffmann G, Lampousi A-M, Knüppel S, Iqbal K,
Schwedhelm C, et al. Food groups and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur J Epide[miol. 2017;32:363–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10654-​017-​0246-y.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-017-0246-y)
21. Rudolf K, Bickmann P, Froböse I, Tholl C, Wechsler K, Grieben C. Demographics and health behavior of video game and eSports players in
Germany: the eSports study 2019. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijerp​h1706​1870.](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17061870)
22. Rudolf K, Soffner M, Bickmann P, Froböse I, Tholl C, Wechsler K, Grieben
C. Media consumption, stress and wellbeing of video game and eSports
players in Germany: the eSports study 2020. Front Sports Act Liv.
[2022;4:665–604. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fspor.​2022.​665604.](https://doi.org/10.3389/fspor.2022.665604)
23. Beckmann K, Glemser A, Heckel C, Heyde C von der, Hoffmeyer-Zlotnik
J, Hanefeld U, et al. Demographische Standards. eine gemeinsame
Empfehlung des ADM, Arbeitskreis Deutscher Markt- und Sozialforschunginstitute e.V., der Arbeitsgemeinschaftt Sozialwissenschaftlicher
Institute e.V. (ASI) und des Statistischen Bundesamtes [Demographical
standards—A common recommendation of the ADM working group of
German Market and Social Research Institutes, working grroup of Social
Science INstitutes (ASI) and the German Federal Statistical Office]. 6th ed.
Wiesbaden: Federal Statistical Office of Germany; 2016.
24. Morfeld M, Kirchberger I, Bullinger M. SF-36: Fragebogen zum Gesundheitszustand 2011. 2nd ed.: Hogrefe.
25. WHO. Wellbeing measures in primary health care/the Depcare project:
[report on a WHO meeting. 1998. https://​www.​euro.​who.​int/__​data/​](https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0016/130750/E60246.pdf)
[assets/​pdf_​file/​0016/​130750/​E60246.​pdf. Accessed 27 Oct 2022.](https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0016/130750/E60246.pdf)
26. Haftenberger M, Heuer T, Heidemann C, Kube F, Krems C, Mensink GBM.
Relative validation of a food frequency questionnaire for national health
[and nutrition monitoring. Nutr J. 2010;9:36. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​](https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2891-9-36)
[1475-​2891-9-​36.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2891-9-36)
27. Stunkard AJ, Sorensen T, Schulsinger F. Use of the Danish adoption
register for the study of obesity and thinness. Res Publ Assoc Res Nervous
Ment Dis. 1983;60:115–20.
28. Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. 2nd ed.
Hove, London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.
29. Froböse I, Biallas B, Wallmann-Sperlich B. DKV-Report 2018: Wie gesund
lebt Deutschland? Düsseldorf; 2018.
30. Clemes SA, Houdmont J, Munir F, Wilson K, Kerr R, Addley K. Descriptive
epidemiology of domain-specific sitting in working adults: the Stormont
[Study. J Public Health. 2016;38:53–60. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​pubmed/​](https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdu114)
[fdu114.](https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdu114)


Soffner _et al. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition      (2023) 42:29_ Page 13 of 13



31. World Health Organization. WHO guidelines on physical activity and
sedentary behaviour. Geneva; 2020.
[32. GBE Bund. Body-mass-index. 2017. https://​www.​gbe-​bund.​de/​gbe/​pkg_​](https://www.gbe-bund.de/gbe/pkg_isgbe5.prc_menu_olap?p_uid=gast&p_aid=28793890&p_sprache=D&p_help=0&p_indnr=434&p_indsp=&p_ityp=H&p_fid)

[isgbe5.​prc_​menu_​olap?p_​uid=​gast&p_​aid=​28793​890&p_​sprac​he=​](https://www.gbe-bund.de/gbe/pkg_isgbe5.prc_menu_olap?p_uid=gast&p_aid=28793890&p_sprache=D&p_help=0&p_indnr=434&p_indsp=&p_ityp=H&p_fid)
[D&p_​help=​0&p_​indnr=​434&p_​indsp=​&p_​ityp=​H&p_​fid=. Accessed 3](https://www.gbe-bund.de/gbe/pkg_isgbe5.prc_menu_olap?p_uid=gast&p_aid=28793890&p_sprache=D&p_help=0&p_indnr=434&p_indsp=&p_ityp=H&p_fid)
Aug 2022.
33. Marker C, Gnambs T, Appel M. Exploring the myth of the chubby gamer:
a meta-analysis on sedentary video gaming and body mass. Soc Sci Med.
[2022;301:112325. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​socsc​imed.​2019.​05.​030.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.05.030)
34. Finger JD, Mensink GBM, Lange C, Manz K. Gesundheitsfördernde körperliche Aktivität in der Freizeit bei Erwachsenen in Deutschland. J Health
[Monit. 2017;2:37–44. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17886/​RKI-​GBE-​2017-​027.](https://doi.org/10.17886/RKI-GBE-2017-027)
35. Lounassalo I, Salin K, Kankaanpää A, Hirvensalo M, Palomäki S, Tolvanen
A, et al. Distinct trajectories of physical activity and related factors during
the life course in the general population: a systematic review. BMC Public
[Health. 2019;19:271. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12889-​019-​6513-y.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-6513-y)
[36. World Health Organization. Physical activity. 2022. https://​www.​who.​int/​](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/physical-activity)

[news-​room/​fact-​sheets/​detail/​physi​cal-​activ​ity. Accessed 15 Nov 2022.](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/physical-activity)
37. Sujoldzić A, de Lucia A. A cross-cultural study of adolescents–BMI, body
image and psychological well-being. Coll Antropol. 2007;31:123–30.
38. Topp CW, Østergaard SD, Søndergaard S, Bech P. The WHO-5 well-being
index: a systematic review of the literature. Psychother Psychosom.
[2015;84:167–76. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1159/​00037​6585.](https://doi.org/10.1159/000376585)
39. Spengler A, Schneider G, Schröder EP. Depressivität – Screening und
Vorkommen in der sportmedizinischen Praxis. Dtsch Z Sportmed.
[2013;2013:65–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5960/​dzsm.​2012.​045.](https://doi.org/10.5960/dzsm.2012.045)
40. Brodeur A, Clark AE, Fleche S, Powdthavee N. COVID-19, lockdowns and
well-being: evidence from Google Trends. J Public Econ. 2021;193:104346.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jpube​co.​2020.​104346.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104346)
41. Patrick SW, Henkhaus LE, Zickafoose JS, Lovell K, Halvorson A, Loch S,
et al. Well-being of parents and children during the COVID-19 pan[demic: a national survey. Pediatrics. 2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1542/​peds.​](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-016824)
[2020-​016824.](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-016824)
42. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Ernährung e.V. Vollwerting essen und trinken
[nach den 10 Regeln der DGE. 2017. https://​www.​dge.​de/​filea​dmin/​](https://www.dge.de/fileadmin/public/doc/fm/10-Regeln-der-DGE.pdf)
[public/​doc/​fm/​10-​Regeln-​der-​DGE.​pdf. Accessed 3 Aug 2022.](https://www.dge.de/fileadmin/public/doc/fm/10-Regeln-der-DGE.pdf)
43. Krug S, Finger JD, Lange C, Richter A, Mensink GBM. Sport- und
Ernährungsverhalten bei Kindern und Jugendlichen in Deutschland:
Querschnittsergebnisse aus KiGGS Welle 2 und Trends. J Health Monit.
[2018;3:3–22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17886/​RKI-​GBE-​2018-​065.](https://doi.org/10.17886/RKI-GBE-2018-065)
[44. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Ernährung e.V. Wasser. 2000. https://​www.​dge.​](https://www.dge.de/wissenschaft/referenzwerte/wasser/)

[de/​wisse​nscha​ft/​refer​enzwe​rte/​wasser/. Accessed 3 Aug 2022.](https://www.dge.de/wissenschaft/referenzwerte/wasser/)
45. Mensink GBM, Schienkiewitz A, Rabenberg M, Borrmann A, Richter
A, Haftenberger M. Konsum zuckerhaltiger Erfrischungsgetränke bei
Kindern und Jugendlichen in Deutschland: Querschnittergebnisse aus
[KiGGS Welle 2 und Trends. J Health Monit. 2018;3:32–9. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.17886/RKI-GBE-2018-007)
[17886/​RKI-​GBE-​2018-​007.](https://doi.org/10.17886/RKI-GBE-2018-007)
46. Rabenberg M, Mensink G. Limo, Saft & Co - Konsum zuckerhaltiger
[Getränke in Deutschland. GBE-Kompakt. 2013;4:1–9. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.25646/3036)
[25646/​3036.](https://doi.org/10.25646/3036)
47. Schulze MB, Manson JE, Ludwig DS, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC,
Hu FB. Sugar-sweetened beverages, weight gain, and incidence of type
2 diabetes in young and middle-aged women. JAMA. 2004;292:927–34.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​jama.​292.8.​927.](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.292.8.927)
[48. VuMA Touchpoints. VuMA Berichtsband 2022. 2021. https://​www.​vuma.​](https://www.vuma.de/fileadmin/user_upload/PDF/berichtsbaende/VuMA_Berichtsband_2022.pdf)

[de/​filea​dmin/​user_​upload/​PDF/​beric​htsba​ende/​VuMA_​Beric​htsba​nd_​](https://www.vuma.de/fileadmin/user_upload/PDF/berichtsbaende/VuMA_Berichtsband_2022.pdf)
[2022.​pdf. Accessed 27 Oct 2022.](https://www.vuma.de/fileadmin/user_upload/PDF/berichtsbaende/VuMA_Berichtsband_2022.pdf)
49. Hennessy M, Bleakley A, Ellithorpe ME, Maloney E, Jordan AB, Stevens R.
Reducing unhealthy normative behavior: the case of sports and energy
[drinks. Health Educ Behav. 2021. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10901​98121​](https://doi.org/10.1177/10901981211055468)
[10554​68.](https://doi.org/10.1177/10901981211055468)
50. Nadeem IM, Shanmugaraj A, Sakha S, Horner NS, Ayeni OR, Khan M.
Energy drinks and their adverse health effects: a systematic review and
[meta-analysis. Sports Health. 2021;13:265–77. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​](https://doi.org/10.1177/1941738120949181)
[19417​38120​949181.](https://doi.org/10.1177/1941738120949181)
51. O’Connor L, Imamura F, Lentjes MAH, Khaw K-T, Wareham NJ, Forouhi
NG. Prospective associations and population impact of sweet beverage
intake and type 2 diabetes, and effects of substitutions with alternative
[beverages. Diabetologia. 2015;58:1474–83. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-015-3572-1)
[s00125-​015-​3572-1.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-015-3572-1)



52. Nowak D, Jasionowski A. Analysis of consumption of energy drinks by a
group of adolescent athletes. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016;13:768.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijerp​h1308​0768.](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13080768)
53. Park S, Onufrak S, Blanck HM, Sherry B. Characteristics associated with
consumption of sports and energy drinks among US adults: National
[Health Interview Survey, 2010. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013;113:112–9. https://​](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2012.09.019)
[doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jand.​2012.​09.​019.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2012.09.019)
54. Statistisches Bundesamt. Annähernder Verbrauch alkoholischer Getränke
[in Deutschland. 2022. https://​www.​desta​tis.​de/​DE/​Themen/​Staat/​Steue​](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Staat/Steuern/Verbrauchsteuern/Tabellen/alkoholische-getraenke.html;jsessionid=E770BA17E6CC4797CD8E408A86EDC8A9.live712#fussnote-1-114210)
[rn/​Verbr​auchs​teuern/​Tabel​len/​alkoh​olisc​he-​getra​enke.​html;​jsess​ionid=​](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Staat/Steuern/Verbrauchsteuern/Tabellen/alkoholische-getraenke.html;jsessionid=E770BA17E6CC4797CD8E408A86EDC8A9.live712#fussnote-1-114210)
[E770B​A17E6​CC479​7CD8E​408A8​6EDC8​A9.​live7​12#​fussn​ote-1-​114210.](https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Staat/Steuern/Verbrauchsteuern/Tabellen/alkoholische-getraenke.html;jsessionid=E770BA17E6CC4797CD8E408A86EDC8A9.live712#fussnote-1-114210)
Accessed 3 Aug 2022.
55. Bundesministerium für Ernährung und Landwirtschaft. Deutschland,
[wie es isst - der BMEL-Ernährungsreport 2021. 2021. https://​www.​bmel.​](https://www.bmel.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Broschueren/ernaehrungsreport-2021.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=5)
[de/​Share​dDocs/​Downl​oads/​DE/​Brosc​hueren/​ernae​hrung​srepo​rt-​2021.​](https://www.bmel.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Broschueren/ernaehrungsreport-2021.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=5)
[pdf?__​blob=​publi​catio​nFile​&v=5. Accessed 3 Aug 2022.](https://www.bmel.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Broschueren/ernaehrungsreport-2021.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=5)
56. World Cancer Research Fund. Meat, fish and dairy products and the risk
[of cancer. 2018. https://​www.​wcrf.​org/​wp-​conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​2021/​02/​](https://www.wcrf.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Meat-fish-and-dairy-products.pdf)
[Meat-​fish-​and-​dairy-​produ​cts.​pdf. Accessed 3 Aug 2022.](https://www.wcrf.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Meat-fish-and-dairy-products.pdf)
57. Dinter J, Bechthold A, Boeing H, Ellinger S, Leschik-Bonnet E, Linseisen
J, et al. Fish intake and prevention of selected nutrition-related diseases.
[Ernährungs Umschau international. 2016;7:148–54. https://​doi.​org/​10.​](https://doi.org/10.4455/eu.2016.032)
[4455/​eu.​2016.​032.](https://doi.org/10.4455/eu.2016.032)
58. Seal CJ, Courtin CM, Venema K, de Vries J. Health benefits of whole grain:
effects on dietary carbohydrate quality, the gut microbiome, and consequences of processing. Compr Rev Food Sci Food Saf. 2021;20:2742–68.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​1541-​4337.​12728.](https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12728)
59. Hullings AG, Sinha R, Liao LM, Freedman ND, Graubard BI, Loftfield E.
Whole grain and dietary fiber intake and risk of colorectal cancer in the
NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study cohort. Am J Clin Nutr. 2020;112:603–12.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​ajcn/​nqaa1​61.](https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/nqaa161)
60. Wang Y, Duan Y, Zhu L, Fang Z, He L, Ai D, Jin Y. Whole grain and cereal
fiber intake and the risk of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Int J Mol
Epidemiol Genet. 2019;10:38–46.
61. Mensink GBM, Truthmann J, Rabenberg M, Heidemann C, Haftenberger
M, Schienkiewitz A, Richter A. Obst- und Gemüsekonsum in Deutschland
: Ergebnisse der Studie zur Gesundheit Erwachsener in Deutschland
(DEGS1). [Fruit and vegetable intake in Germany: results of the German
Health Interview and Examination Survey for Adults (DEGS1)]. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2013;56:779–
[85. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00103-​012-​1651-8.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00103-012-1651-8)
[62. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Ernährung e.V. 5 am Tag. n.d. https://​www.​dge.​](https://www.dge.de/ernaehrungspraxis/vollwertige-ernaehrung/5-am-tag/)

[de/​ernae​hrung​sprax​is/​vollw​ertige-​ernae​hrung/5-​am-​tag/. Accessed 3](https://www.dge.de/ernaehrungspraxis/vollwertige-ernaehrung/5-am-tag/)
Aug 2022.
63. Boeing H, Bechthold A, Bub A, Ellinger S, Haller D, Kroke A, et al. Critical
review: vegetables and fruit in the prevention of chronic diseases. Eur J
[Nutr. 2012;51:637–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00394-​012-​0380-y.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00394-012-0380-y)
64. World Health Organization. Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic
[diseases. 2003. http://​apps.​who.​int/​iris/​bitst​ream/​handle/​10665/​42665/​](http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/42665/WHO_TRS_916.pdf;jsessionid=3E10DB41A6A40A54A5A5D10AC317F3A6?sequence=1)
[WHO_​TRS_​916.​pdf;​jsess​ionid=​3E10D​B41A6​A40A5​4A5A5​D10AC​317F3​](http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/42665/WHO_TRS_916.pdf;jsessionid=3E10DB41A6A40A54A5A5D10AC317F3A6?sequence=1)
[A6?​seque​nce=1. Accessed 27 Oct 2022.](http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/42665/WHO_TRS_916.pdf;jsessionid=3E10DB41A6A40A54A5A5D10AC317F3A6?sequence=1)
65. Moosburger R, Lage Barbosa C, Haftenberger M, Brettschneider A-K,
Lehmann F, Kroke A, Mensink GBM. Fast Food-Konsum der Jugendlichen
[in Deutschland – Ergebnisse aus EsKiMo II. 2020;5:3–19. https://​doi.​org/​](https://doi.org/10.25646/6394)
[10.​25646/​6394.](https://doi.org/10.25646/6394)
66. Prince SA, Adamo KB, Hamel ME, Hardt J, Connor Gorber S, Tremblay M.
A comparison of direct versus self-report measures for assessing physical
activity in adults: a systematic review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2008;5:56.
[https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​1479-​5868-5-​56.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-5-56)


**Publisher’s Note**
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


