# Books and electronic media



administered routine services and thus
invite suspicions. Routine services represent flows of benefits from a sovereign,
benevolent state, and the integration
of disease eradication programmes into
routine services is seen by Leach & Fairhead as an important step forward.

The authors offer a stimulating,
fresh, but not necessarily comfortable,
look at the vaccination controversy, and
their book should prove valuable reading
for a broad specialist and non-specialist
audience. Readers will find that familiarity with the terminology of anthropology and modern social studies of science
and medicine is, however, helpful. The
analysis and the conclusions of the book
will not serve as easy ammunition for
any side of the debate. The authors emphasize that vaccines save lives, promote
child health and reduce disease burden
among the poor. But they are adamant
that vaccine anxieties need to be taken
seriously. Leach & Fairhead maintain
that vaccine delivery systems must suit
social, cultural and political realities. The
ethnographic perspective does suggest
several possible means to bridge the gulf
that has emerged between parents and
what the authors describe as “vaccination technocracies”. They recommend
that information should not be delivered
in a top-down manner, but that a more
dialogue-based approach, acknowledging
the possible complementarities between
“traditional” practices and “modern”
medicine, needs to be developed. Acceptance of all parental worries and anxieties
is not necessarily called for, but at least
more attentiveness to these issues by
public health practitioners. 

**Thomas P Weber** [a]



**Vaccine anxieties: global**
**science, child health and society**


Authors: Melissa Leach & James Fairhead
Publisher: Earthscan, London, 2007
ISBN: 978-1-84407-370-2; paperback;
224 pages; price £19.99


Since its very inception, the practice
of mass vaccination has frequently met
with ambivalence and occasionally
encountered open resistance. For many
health professionals, this opposition was
and remains a mystery. How can parents
deny their children a preventive treatment of such obvious individual and
public benefit?

The lack of public acceptance of
vaccination is often explained as resulting from an information and knowledge
deficit. The British social anthropologists
Melissa Leach and James Fairhead draw
on experiences from their extensive ethnographic fieldwork in the United Kingdom and several west African countries
to argue that this attitude overlooks how
people themselves understand health
and vaccines, and whether a globalized
medical technology meets the profoundly personal, social and cultural worlds
of infant care. They maintain that the
concepts of risk, trust and rumour that
have been the cornerstones of existing
policies and social science discourse on
resistance to vaccination are inadequate
and are actually part of the problem. The
authors prefer the notion of “anxiety”,
which can both denote an uneasiness
of and a desire for a technology, and
encompasses bodily, social and political
dimensions. According to them, this
term captures well the ambivalence of
attitudes and the often deeply personal
struggles that people face when making
decisions about vaccination.

Leach & Fairhead steer clear of portraying parents as being easily and carelessly influenced by dubious information
or as merely following the agenda of an
ill-defined “anti-vaccination movement”.
Rather, they draw on the conceptual
tool of “framing” to study the different
perceptions of parents and public health
practitioners: attitudes towards medical technology can be seen as a kind of
story-telling by communities situated



in particular times and places, attempting to deal with potentially troubling
challenges in their lives. The “story”,
the “frame”, gives meaning to complex
and challenging experiences. In the
United Kingdom, for example, attitudes
towards vaccination are embedded into
a context of personalized perspectives
concerning parenting, child development and health. Whereas epidemiology
takes a population-based approach to
risk, parents facing the decision to have
their child vaccinated might view the
situation from a different perspective

- that of the specific health history of
the family and the child and of personal
experiences with institutions. Parents do
not assess risk on a population level, but
in relation to their child. Public health
practitioners and many citizens often
have views of government, society and
of the body that are at odds with one
another and to describe those opposing
views using concepts such as ignorance
of “sound science” seems highly inappropriate to the authors of this book.

In west Africa, traditional ideas
about the causes of health and disease
affect attitudes towards vaccination, but
other factors matter as well. Particularly
interesting are the social dimensions of
attendance at vaccination sessions. Not
only in remote areas, but also in urban
areas, vaccination attendance is not just
a parental decision, but a matter of community orchestration. This most often
encourages attendance, but in some cases
can lead to stigmatization, because the
state of the child does necessarily reflect
the moral status of the mother. Vaccination also has wider political dimensions.
International vaccination campaigns
are often disconnected from nationally
# **Letters**



Please visit http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/86/9/en/index.html to read the
following letters received in response to _Bulletin_ papers:
**Evaluation of the WHO Assessment Instrument for Mental Health Systems,**
by Hamada Hamid, Karen Abanilla, Besa Bauta & Keng-Yen Huang
responding to a letter from:
Saxena S, Lora A, van Ommeren M, Barrett T, Morris J, Saraceno B. Evaluation of the WHO Assessment Instrument for Mental Health Systems. _Bull World_
_Health Organ_ 2008;86:656.



a Joint Research Centre, European Commission, TP 267, Via E Fermi 2749, I-21027 Ispra, Italy.
Correspondence to Thomas P Weber (e-mail: Thomas.Weber@jrc.it).


**736** Bulletin of the World Health Organization | September 2008, 86 (9)


