Pampel et al. Page 2


We review explanations of the relationship between low SES and unhealthy behaviors and
the empirical support they have received. In focusing on the mechanisms that account for the
relationships between SES and health behaviors, we review studies from sociology,
economics, and public health that go beyond description and that offer insight into the
sources of health inequality. These studies recognize that SES disparities in health behavior
involve more than freely chosen lifestyles. To the contrary, the explanations reviewed below
suggest that unhealthy behaviors result from the vast differences in the social circumstances
of low- and high-SES groups. Our attention to the social origins of health behavior runs
counter to perspectives that ignore how SES structures social life.


For several reasons, we limit the health behaviors we examine. Avoidance of tobacco,
participation in physical activity, and maintenance of proper weight and diet involve actions
that, certainly for smoking and by most accounts for the others, promote health and extend
longevity (Rogers et al. 2000). These behaviors also differ from others that depend more
directly on having the financial resources to purchase health. It makes sense that the less
well-off have fewer opportunities to undergo regular preventive medical checkups and
screenings, to work at jobs with low physical danger or contact with hazardous materials, to
live in well-built housing in safe neighborhoods with low pollution, and to drive safe cars.
Although finances relate in some ways to tobacco cessation (paying for counseling),
exercise (joining gyms and clubs), and good diet (buying fresh fruits and vegetables or lean
meats), money nonetheless is not a requirement as it is for other health behaviors. Tobacco
use, to the contrary, involves significant monetary costs—on average about $1638 per year
for a pack-a-day smoker (Smith 2008).


Other behaviors involving use of illegal drugs and participation in criminal violence
likewise create risks to health but raise issues different from legal behaviors. Reviews of
these behaviors and of research on crime and deviance warrant separate study (although
some theories posit a link between participation in legal but unhealthy behavior and
participation in illegal behavior). Alcohol consumption has similarities to use of illegal
substances (e.g., driving under the influence) and, except at extremely high levels that are
relatively rare in the U.S. adult population, has an ambiguous relationship with health and
mortality outcomes (Rogers et al. 2000, Thun et al. 1997). Another health behavior, sleep
durations of shorter or longer than seven hours per night, is associated with increased
mortality, but little research has systematically examined the relationship between SES and
sleep duration (Krueger & Friedman 2009, Moore et al. 2002). Still further, health care
consumption, adherence to treatment regimens, interaction with physicians, and acceptance
of new medical technologies greatly influence health and mortality and are the subject of
large literatures (Cutler & Lleras-Muney 2010, Glied & Lleras-Muney 2008, Hadley 2003,
Lutfey & Freese 2005, Phelan et al. 2004, Ross & Mirowsky 2000). Because of space
constraints, we give only minimal attention to these behaviors.


SES (or sometimes socioeconomic position) refers to standing in the stratification system
and is usually measured by education, occupation, employment, income, and wealth. These
components of SES are not interchangeable and have different kinds of influences on health
behavior. SES can reflect diverse underlying theoretical concerns such as material wellbeing, human capital, prestige, and productive relations. Even so, it is convenient to refer to
SES as a summary term (without assuming that it represents a unidimensional construct)
when the particular measure does not have key importance.


**IMPORTANCE OF HEALTH BEHAVIOR FOR SES HEALTH DISPARITIES**


The focus on SES disparities in health behaviors has generated some dispute. Lantz et al.
(1998) reject claims that elevated mortality risks among disadvantaged SES groups come


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 3


primarily from the higher prevalence of risky behaviors in these groups. In comparing
mortality over a 7.5-year period, Lantz and colleagues find that the odds ratio for the lowest
to the highest education group falls by only 14% with controls for smoking, drinking,
sedentary lifestyle, and relative body weight. Similarly, a study of British civil servants over
a 25-year period shows that smoking and other coronary risk factors account for 27% of the
inverse social gradient in coronary heart disease (Marmot 2006). Studies that use different
methods find stronger effects. Using indirect estimation techniques to attribute mortality to
either smoking-related causes or other causes among men ages 36–69 in four nations, Jha et
al. (2006) calculate that smoking accounts for nearly half of the excess mortality among the
lowest stratum in each nation.


Regardless of the method used or conclusion reached, SES disparities clearly involve more
than health behaviors such as smoking, exercise, and eating. Some suggest that even if
differences in health behaviors across socioeconomic strata disappeared, the relationship
between SES and health would change little, as other sources of disparities would grow in
importance (Link & Phelan 1995). At the same time, health behaviors account for, on
average, roughly one-quarter of SES disparities in health—an amount of some importance.


To present some numbers, Table 1 describes the disparities for several components of SES
and smoking, exercise, and body mass using the 2006 National Health Interview Survey for
persons ages 25–64 (National Center for Health Statistics 2008). The dichotomous outcomes
assign values of one to survey participants who currently smoke, do not participate in
vigorous or moderate physical activity, or have a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or more
(obese). The SES predictors are treated categorically, with the highest category serving as
the referent so that odds ratios compare lower SES groups to higher SES groups. The
logistic regression estimates for SES control for gender, race-ethnicity, age, age squared,
and foreign birth.


The results in Table 1 show large disparities for smoking and no exercise and more modest
disparities for obesity. Of the SES variables, education generally has the strongest influence.
1 For example, without controls for other SES variables, high school dropouts have odds of
smoking and not exercising that are, respectively, 3.7 and 4.9 times larger than for college
graduates. The three columns on the right of the table show that controls for the other SES
variables reduce the odds ratios to 2.9 and 2.8, respectively, but they remain substantial. The
lowest occupation and income groups have net odds ratios for smoking and not exercising
ranging from 1.2 to 1.9. Renting rather than owning and unemployment increase the odds of
smoking but do not increase the odds of not exercising. Not surprisingly given evidence
suggesting that SES disparities in obesity have lessened over the past three decades (Zhang
& Wang 2004), the results for obesity show smaller SES differences. The odds ratios reach
1.8 in the gross models and 1.5 in the net models.


Socioeconomic conditions may produce an underlying health lifestyle that similarly affects
smoking, exercise, and diet (Cockerham 2005). Vigorous exercise, for example, promotes
weight control and nonsmoking. This clustering encourages prevention efforts on unhealthy
behaviors in general and warrants drawing generalizations across multiple behaviors.
However, health behaviors differ in important ways that may affect the potential for
disparities. Smoking requires action to purchase cigarettes, whereas lack of exercise
involves inaction; quitting smoking often produces unpleasant symptoms of withdrawal and
increases weight, whereas starting to exercise often increases feelings of well-being and


1Although measures are seldom available and rarely studied, subjective status may influence health independent of objective status
(Schnittker & McLeod 2005).


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 4


reduces weight. Given these differences, we treat literatures on smoking, exercise, and diet
as separate but also attempt to draw some generalizations.


**EXPLANATIONS**


Link & Phelan (1995) point out that resources favoring high-SES groups are so extensive
and wide-ranging as to make SES a fundamental cause of health. Because the underlying
relationship between SES and health persists through historical changes in causes of death,
advances in medical treatments, and new public health efforts, no single mechanism
accounts for the observed relationship (Lutfey & Freese 2005). Rather, some diminish in
importance in particular situations while others increase. To define the sources of enduring
SES advantages more clearly, we consider nine broad mechanisms that underlie the
relationship between SES and health behavior.


**Deprivation, Inequality, and Stress**

In the stress paradigm, disadvantaged social position is both a source of adversity and a
drain on the capacity to cope (e.g., Pearlin 1989). Given these circumstances, smoking,
overeating, and inactivity represent forms of pleasure and relaxation that help regulate mood
among the disadvantaged (Lantz et al. 2005, Layte & Whelan 2009, Wilkinson 1996). The
coping or self-medicating functions of these behaviors make the costs of giving them up
particularly salient and limit the ability of low-SES individuals to adopt healthy but
challenging behaviors (Lutfey & Freese 2005).


Those deprived economically and living in disadvantaged neighborhoods face a variety of
chronic stressors in daily living: They struggle to make ends meet; have few opportunities to
achieve positive goals; experience more negative life events such as unemployment, marital
disruption, and financial loss; and must deal with discrimination, marginality, isolation, and
powerlessness (Baum et al. 1999, Lantz et al. 2005, McEwen 1998). These stresses trigger a
host of compulsive behaviors such as overeating, drinking, and smoking (Björntorp 2001,
Marmot 2004). Studies give indirect support to stress arguments by showing higher smoking
among persons in positions of high stress, including unemployed workers (Fagan et al.
2007), poor single women with childrearing duties (Graham 1995, Marsh & McKay 1994),
those from disadvantaged backgrounds (Lynch et al. 1997), and residents of deprived
neighborhoods (Duncan et al. 1999). In terms of diet, Miech et al. (2006) find that family
poverty status is associated with increasing overweight prevalence for 15- to 17-year-olds.


Other studies do more than describe the association between stress and unhealthy behaviors.
Johnson & Hoffman (2000) find that smoking increases among poor performing students in
more competitive schools, a proxy for pressures faced by students. Colby et al. (1994) find
that a stress index based on divorce, business failures, and natural disasters for U.S. states
relates to state smoking prevalence. Several studies measuring perceived stress or biological
stress markers find relationships with higher fat consumption and lower levels of mild,
moderate, and strenuous physical activity (Burdette & Hill 2008, Dallman et al. 2003, Ng &
Jeffery 2003). Grunberg et al. (1999) find evidence that workers who report higher job stress
also report problem drinking and heavy drinking more frequently, but only if they also
endorse the notion that drinking is an effective strategy for coping with stress.


The research on the relationship between SES, stress, and health behaviors faces at least two
limitations, however. First, although low-SES individuals may experience more stressors,
they also report lower levels of perceived stress than their high-SES counterparts (Krueger
& Chang 2008, Schieman et al. 2006). Further, low-SES individuals report fewer but more
severe daily stressors (Grzywacz et al. 2004). The inconsistent relationship between SES
and various measures of stress (e.g., perceived stress, acute or chronic stressors, daily


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 5


hassles) suggests the need for research on whether some dimensions of stress are especially
important mediators of the relationship between SES and health behaviors.


Second, prior research often assumes that stress precedes rather than follows unhealthy
behavior, although the evidence on smoking and physical activity is less clear. Parrott
(1999) argues that smoking worsens stress by creating nicotine dependency. Although
cigarettes temporarily relieve withdrawal symptoms, greater exposure to nicotine
withdrawal increases stress among smokers. Lang et al. (2007) similarly find that levels of
pleasure differ little among low-SES smokers and nonsmokers. Exercise and stress may also
have a bidirectional relationship. Although most individuals may respond to stress by
becoming more sedentary, Salmon (2001) suggests that exercise may produce
neurochemical changes in the body that reduce depression and anxiety and moderate
sensitivity to stress. Although smoking or inactivity may alleviate stress in the short term,
they might increase stress levels in the long term.


A related version of the stress argument focuses less on absolute than on relative
deprivation. Because the SES gradient in health behavior is continuous, with each level
showing quantitatively higher prevalence of health behaviors, something more than a
threshold of economic and social deprivation must be involved (Adler et al. 1994, Marmot
2004). Rather, disadvantageous social comparisons among nearly all SES groups with those
at higher levels weaken social cohesion across society in ways that motivate unhealthy
behaviors to deal with the stress (Marmot 2004). High degrees of societal inequality thus
worsen feelings of relative deprivation and contribute to disparities in health behavior
(Wilkinson 1996).


Support for arguments about relative deprivation comes from studies showing a positive
relationship between income in equality and mortality across nations, states, or metropolitan
areas. However, a huge literature that has grown on the topic has led to negative evidence
(e.g., Beckfield 2004) or at least failed to reach a consensus on whether the relationship is
real (Schnittker & McLeod 2005). Although health behaviors have a prominent role in the
relative deprivation arguments, few studies examine behaviors directly. Using individuallevel data on smoking, Siahpush et al. (2006a) find that high perceived income inequality is
associated with higher smoking, and Eibner & Evans (2005) find that deprivation measured
relative to those in the same state, race, education, and age group increases the probability of
taking health risks. In an aggregate-level study, however, Pampel (2002) finds that relative
deprivation does not explain strong SES smoking disparities across egalitarian member
nations of the European Union. Similarly, Chang & Christakis (2005) find no positive
association between income inequality and the odds of being overweight or obese.


**Fewer Benefits of Health Behaviors for Longevity**

Claims that low-SES groups have less to gain from healthy behavior come from economics,
epidemiology, and sociology. Economists argue that the lower lifetime earnings and wealth
of low-SES groups give them less reason to invest in future longevity and more reason to
focus on the present in making decisions about health behaviors (Cutler & Lleras-Muney
2008). In the language of economics, their risk or time preferences more heavily discount
the future. For example, the declining cost of food in recent decades should increase the
utility of all individuals, but some economists suggest that a subset of individuals have
hyperbolic discount functions and benefit intensely from eating immediately, regardless of
the medium- or long-term health costs (Cutler et al. 2003).


With regard to smoking, the rational addiction model of Gary Becker (Becker & Murphy
1988, Becker et al. 1994) predicts that, given their future orientation, the highly educated are
little influenced by cigarette prices but that less educated persons make smoking decisions


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 6


based more on current cigarette prices. Evidence that cigarette prices reduce smoking is
strong—a 10% increase in cigarette prices leads to a 4% decline in smoking (Gallet & List
2003). Consistent with the model, some argue further that prices more strongly reduce
smoking among low-SES groups and therefore reduce disparities (Farrelly & Bray 1998,
Thomas et al. 2008). However, skeptics claim that youth are more influenced by peers than
by prices (DeCicca et al. 2002) and note that SES disparities have failed to decline as
expected in the United States with increasing prices (Pampel 2009).


Physical activity, eating patterns, and sleep, although different from smoking in their
requirement for substantial time commitments, also reflect different incentives by SES.
Economists note that individuals with higher incomes face greater opportunity costs in
exercising, preparing nutritious meals, or sleeping because their time is valued more highly
in the labor force. Simultaneously, however, individuals with greater human capital or
higher earnings gain more financially from exercise, nutrition, and sleep through improved
productivity and longer lives (Biddle & Hamermesh 1990). High-SES groups therefore
exercise more on weekends and holidays when the opportunity costs are lowest (Mullahy &
Robert 2008), report shorter sleep hours on average (Biddle & Hamermesh 1990, Mullahy &
Robert 2008), and avoid very short sleep hours (Krueger & Friedman 2009).


Technological advances in food processing and preparation lower the price and time costs of
eating but may increase obesity, although those changes likely affect all SES groups equally
(Cutler et al. 2003). Chou et al. (2004) find that the growth in fast-food restaurants and the
simultaneous decline in the relative cost of a meal over time in the United States coincide
with weight gain. The authors suggest that this may result from the “increasing scarcity and
increasing value of household or nonmarket time” (Chou et al. 2004, p. 584). Because both
high- and low-SES groups value their increasingly limited time outside of work and come to
rely on fast food, such explanations may partially account for the declining SES gradient in
obesity in the United States (Zhang & Wang 2004).


Epidemiological and sociological arguments also suggest that increased risks of premature
death brought on by worse social conditions among low-SES persons make health behaviors
less beneficial. Low-SES groups may believe they gain little in terms of longevity from
healthy behavior (Lawlor et al. 2003) and feel fatalistic about their ability to act in ways that
extend their lives (Niederdeppe et al. 2008). For example, smoking is more common among
blue-collar workers who are exposed at work to dangerous dust, fumes, and toxic substances
(Sterling & Weinkam 1990). Adams & White (2009) find that a strong concern with the
future consequences of health decisions partially mediates the relationship between SES and
body weight. Lynch et al. (1997) find that those having experienced socioeconomic
disadvantage early in their lives feel a heightened sense of hopelessness throughout the life
course that affects health behaviors, and Vangeli & West (2008) find that high-SES groups
attempt to quit smoking because of future health concerns, whereas low-SES groups are
more often motivated by cost and current health problems. Niederdeppe & Levy (2007) find
that the less educated are more likely to agree with fatalistic statements about their ability to
reduce their risks of cancer. Those agreeing with fatalistic statements are more likely to
smoke and are less likely to exercise or eat fruits and vegetables.


Indulging in enjoyable but unhealthy behaviors may make sense given a shorter life
expectancy and a limited payoff from healthier behavior. Interestingly, Blaxter (1990) offers
empirical support for these beliefs. She finds that healthy lifestyles do less to lower mortality
among low-SES groups than among high-SES groups. But recent evidence contradicts
Blaxter’s hypothesis (Krueger & Chang 2008, Pampel & Rogers 2004). Even so, belief in
the limited benefits of healthy behavior may obstruct action among low-SES groups.


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 7


**Latent Traits**

Some arguments suggest that latent traits determine both SES and health behavior. If traits
determined early enough in life affect educational and occupational attainment as well as
adult health behaviors, then SES has a spurious relationship with health rather than a direct
or indirect causal effect (Fuchs 1982). Studies generally find a causal impact of education on
health more generally (de Walque 2007, Mirowsky & Ross 2003). However, some
arguments about self-control and intelligence fit a latent trait perspective.


One stream of literature notes that both crime and unhealthy behaviors such as cigarette use
come from the same family, peer, and community influences (Jacobson et al. 2001).
According to Gottfredson & Hirschi (1990), both crime and smoking involve low selfcontrol, attraction to risk, and the propensity to choose short-term gain even in the face of
long-term harm. The attraction to short-term gain emerges early in life, in large part through
poor parental socialization, and in turn leads to poor performance in school, limited career
options, and unhealthy behavior (Hirschi & Gottfredson 1994). Gottfredson (2004) suggests
that general intelligence rather than self-control and attraction to risk is crucial to the
relationship between SES and health. This latent trait not only affects educational and
occupational attainment but also physical fitness, nonsmoking, preference for low-sugar,
low-fat diets, and adherence to regimens to change unhealthy behaviors.


Few direct tests of the latent trait arguments appear in the literature, nearly all focused on
smoking. Farrell & Fuchs (1982) show that the relationship between schooling and smoking
at age 24 is accounted for by smoking at age 17— before education is completed. They do
not measure the factor underlying the early emergence of the relationship between schooling
and smoking, but their results are consistent with the latent trait argument. Other studies
demonstrate that health lifestyles are related to crime and deviance among teens (Paternoster
& Brame 1998) and that college students who smoke are involved in various risky activities
(Emmons et al. 1998). Again, the findings provide only indirect evidence. Gottfredson
(2004) cites much literature on the relationship between intelligence and health, but Link et
al. (2008) find that controls for intelligence do little to change the relationship between SES
and health. Also rejecting the latent trait argument, Cutler & Lleras-Muney (2008) cite
findings of little relationship between risk preferences and smoking.


**Class Distinctions**

High-SES groups may use the adoption of healthy behaviors and lifestyles to set themselves
apart from other SES groups (Cockerham 2005). Tobacco avoidance (Pampel 2006),
exercise (Stempel 2005), and thinness (Hesse-Biber 2007, McLaren 2007) represent forms
of SES-based social distinction as well as means to a longer life. Although applied to health
behavior rather than consumer goods, such arguments stem from classical and modern
theorists (Bourdieu 1984, Veblen 1992 [1899]) who emphasize lifestyle as a source of social
differentiation and the adoption of innovative fashion as a way to reinforce those
differences.


Smoking represented an innovative behavior early in the twentieth century that, despite early
worries about its harm to health, was first adopted by high-SES groups, perhaps as a form of
distinction, and later diffused to lower SES groups (Pampel 2005). In more recent decades,
class distinction shows in the early adoption of the innovative idea that changing individual
behavior can extend life (Link 2008). Today, smoking is stigmatized more among highly
educated than among less educated groups (Stuber et al. 2008). If class distinction gives
motives for high-SES groups to act in healthy ways, it may also motivate lower SES groups
to set themselves apart with behavior like smoking that, in some contexts, symbolizes
independence, toughness, and freedom from convention.


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 8


High-status groups also distinguish themselves from low-status groups by participating in
activities such as strenuous aerobic sports, moderate levels of weight training, competitive
sports that limit physical domination, or activities that require extensive training or other
hidden entry requirements aside from simple economic costs (Bourdieu 1984, Stempel
2005). In contrast, low-status groups participate in activities that emphasize strength or the
visible appearance of strength, physical domination, and direct physical violence. Wilson
(2002) finds that higher levels of economic capital (as indicated by income) and cultural
capital (as indicated by education) predict greater participation in sports in general, but
attendance at automobile or motorcycle races is most common among those with low levels
of cultural capital and is insensitive to levels of economic capital. Scheerder et al. (2002)
show that high occupational status groups are more likely to play golf, low-status groups are
more likely to participate in boxing or wrestling, and both high- and low-status groups
participate in soccer.


The tastes for different sports across socioeconomic groups may result in SES differences in
lifelong activity levels. First, high-status groups often embrace activities that can be
maintained throughout middle and older age such as tennis or jogging. Second, Howell &
McKenzie (1987) find that high-status individuals cultivate participation in any sport:
Compared to students in vocational tracks in high school, students in college preparatory
tracks have higher levels of sports participation in later life. Further, watching television is a
sedentary activity that often displaces time for exercise and is stigmatized in higher SES
households. College-educated parents are less likely than others to permit their children to
have televisions in their bedrooms or to allow television viewing during meals (Berry 2007).
Finally, high-status groups exhibit the characteristics of cultural omnivores—they have
wide-ranging participation in both elite and middle-brow sports but avoid the low-brow
sports favored by low-status individuals (Stempel 2005). Participation in a wide variety of
sports among high-status groups facilitates continued activity even if injury, time
constraints, or other barriers limit participating in any single activity.


Although the effects have possibly lessened over time, there is also evidence of class
distinctions in diet and weight (McLaren 2007, Sobal & Stunkard 1989). Research suggests
a socioeconomic gradient in diet for more developed countries that results in lower weights
for the most well-off (McLaren 2007). The gradient is especially pronounced for women
(McLaren & Kuh 2004), where thinness is viewed as a sign of beauty, fashion, and prestige.
In less developed countries, a positive association between SES and weight predominates,
where excess weight may signify success and well-being. Especially for men, larger body
size is often viewed as a sign of physical dominance and prowess (McLaren 2007).
Consistent with class-based norms in higher-income nations, however, an inverse gradient in
obesity is emerging in lesser developed countries (Monteiro et al. 2004).


**Lack of Knowledge and Access to Information about Health Risks**

Less educated persons with jobs that offer few opportunities for learning may have limited
knowledge of the harm of unhealthy behavior and therefore less motivation to adopt healthy
behaviors. They are exposed less often to warnings about smoking, poor diet, and lack of
exercise and may not grasp the potential long-term harm of these activities (Siahpush et al.
2006b). They instead may be exposed more to advertising that promotes the enjoyment of
tobacco and unhealthy food and associates smoking, drinking, and eating with a glamorous
lifestyle.


However, evidence suggests that knowledge of the risks of smoking is widespread and does
little to account for SES disparities. Although differences in knowledge of risks of smoking
played a more important role in the past (Link 2008), more recent antitobacco campaigns,
public education, the nonsmokers rights movement, and comprehensive state programs to


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 9


raise prices, pass clean indoor air laws, and fund media campaigns have successfully
publicized risks and reduced smoking (Warner 2005). In 1999, 92% of Americans linked
smoking with cancer, and in 2006 84% agreed that smoking is very harmful for adults (Saad
2006). Although they may rationalize their habit by minimizing the harm, smokers in all
SES groups likely know of the majority opinion about the harm of smoking. In support of
this claim, the desire to quit differs little by SES (Barbeau et al. 2004, Link 2008). In fact,
Viscusi& Hakes (2008) find that better educated persons perceive smoking as less
dangerous than less educated persons. Layte & Whelan (2009) find that measures of
knowledge about the risks do little to explain SES differences in smoking. Interestingly,
many physicians in developing nations smoke, despite medical education and knowledge of
the harm of smoking (Smith & Leggat 2007).


Knowledge about the importance of adequate exercise and sleep for good health is also
widespread. In 2005, 86% of adults agreed with the statement that a lack of sleep is bad for
their health and 63% said that regular exercise is a highly important activity for a healthy
lifestyle (Lyons 2005).


But knowledge about the risks of obesity is less widespread and differs by SES. Only 36%
of U.S. adults rate obesity as a very serious health problem—far behind AIDS, even though
obesity contributes to more deaths each year (Bleich et al. 2007). Compared to those with
less than a high school degree, those with more than a college degree are 3.6 times as likely
to report that they pay a lot or a fair amount of attention to nutritional information from
scientific experts. Similarly, higher educational attainment is related to an awareness of
whether one is overweight (Paeratakul et al. 2002), and knowledge about the risks of obesity
can contribute to attempts to control weight (Kan & Tsai 2004). Indeed, the effectiveness of
educational programs for promoting proper diet among low-income adults (Howard-Pitney
et al. 1997) suggests that poor knowledge about nutrition may partially account for SES
differences in weight.


**Efficacy and Agency**

Schooling increases the efficacy, problem-solving skills, ability to process information, and
locus of control needed to overcome obstacles to good health such as nicotine addiction, the
inertia of inactivity, the discomfort of exercise, and the desire for unhealthy foods and
excess calories. Mirowsky & Ross (2003, p. 1) make the case for the causal benefits of
education:


Education creates desirable outcomes because it trains individuals to acquire,
evaluate, and use information. It teaches individuals to tap the power of knowledge.
Education develops learned effectiveness that enables self-direction toward any and
all values sought, including health.


The increase in human capital, effective agency, and a sense of personal control that comes
with greater education (Mirowsky & Ross 2007) proves particularly important in dealing
with the difficulties of adopting and maintaining healthy lifestyles.2 In fact, highly educated
persons may induce short-term stress as a means for long-term gain (Thoits 2006)— a key to
overcoming initial feelings of discomfort and deprivation that come from adopting healthy
behaviors. Conversely, less educated persons in positions of powerlessness have more
trouble overcoming the obstacles to healthy behavior. Thus, the ability to act on health
knowledge rather than the knowledge itself affects health behavior.3


2Mirowsky & Ross (2003) in particular make causal arguments. They reject claims that latent traits or advantaged backgrounds
produce a spurious relationship between educational attainment and health. Rather, those attaining advanced education learn new
skills and gain new confidence for problem solving that make it easier to adopt healthy, though difficult, behaviors.


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 10


Efficacy and agency include the search for innovative means to help change behavior and
relate to a long tradition of research on diffusion of innovations that identifies education as a
key to early adoption (Rogers 2003). Consistent with diffusion research, high-SES groups
are quickest to use new medical technologies, such as Pap smears and mammography for
screening or coronary stents and statins for treatment (Glied & Lleras-Muney 2008, Link et
al. 1998). High-SES groups not only seek out new health-promoting technologies, but they
also are better able to overcome obstacles to using those new technologies effectively to
promote health behavior. In relation to health behaviors, then, high-SES groups are open to
new smoking cessation methods, diets, and exercise regimens.


Consistent with these arguments, studies of smoking find that education increases both the
use of aids to help quit (Honjo et al. 2006) and the responsiveness to antismoking ad
campaigns (Niederdeppe et al. 2008). The higher educated also learn more from negative
health events. Wray et al. (1998) find that educated persons are more likely to quit smoking
after a heart attack. Droomers et al. (1998) find that locus of control and active problem
solving explain about half the relationship between education and physical activity. Cutler &
Lleras-Muney (2010) attribute roughly 30% of the education gradient across a large number
of health behaviors to cognitive ability but note that the influence of cognitive ability stems
ultimately from higher education rather than from a latent trait determined earlier in life.


A weakness in the efficacy argument comes from SES disparities in health behaviors other
than smoking, exercise, and weight control that require little in the way of effort, problem
solving, or efficacy (Freese & Lutfey 2010). For example, seat belts require less than a
second to buckle, but despite decades of publicity about the benefit, laws making seatbelts
mandatory in many states, and dashboard warning lights, a SES disparity persists (Harper &
Lynch 2007). This persistence suggests that disparities involve something more than
problem solving or cognitive ability.


**Aids for Healthy Behavior**

Adopting many healthy behaviors does not require money, but paying for tobacco cessation
aids, joining fitness clubs and weight loss programs, and buying more expensive fruits,
vegetables, and lean meats can help realize desires for healthy behavior. Income and the
ability to pay for these kinds of aids can help overcome low education, efficacy, and agency
and thus represent an independent means to healthy behavior. Cutler&Lleras-Muney (2010)
attribute roughly 20% of the education gradient in health behaviors to economic resources.


For smoking, individual counseling and medications to ease withdrawal symptoms can be
costly, and low-SES groups tend to use low-cost and often less effective methods (Lillard et
al. 2007). For exercise, since the 1960s the prices of sports equipment, bicycles, and sports
club memberships have increased more quickly than the prices of televisions or movie
tickets, whereas the income per hour of leisure time has fallen most among those with lower
incomes (Berry 2007). Droomers et al. (1998) find that income accounts for up to 40% of
the increased odds of physical inactivity among less educated individuals, even after
adjusting for psychosocial factors. And for weight control, some researchers contend that the
obesity epidemic is a relatively simple matter of changing economics—the drastic increase
in obese persons in developed countries coincides with dropping prices of refined grains and
added sugars and fats, making these cheap, high-calorie foods accessible to low-SES groups
(Drewnowski 2004).


3This form of means-based knowledge differs conceptually from knowledge of the risks of unhealthy behavior discussed above.
Although knowledge of both risks and ways to reduce risks overlaps, the more widespread access to knowledge of risk across SES
groups makes it different from the less widespread knowledge and skills to adopt healthy behaviors.


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 11


Occupational resources overlap with financial ones. Those with good jobs and benefit
packages gain access to aids for healthy behavior without having to purchase them. In regard
to smoking, workers with better jobs may have employer-provided health insurance and
better access to health care, which increasingly emphasizes the treatment of tobacco
dependency (Manley et al. 2003). In addition, the worksites of higher prestige professional,
managerial, and administrative employees more often have clean indoor air rules that make
smoking more difficult, and they sometimes offer smoking cessation programs that help
smokers quit (Bauer et al. 2005). Blue-collar and factory workers have less access to these
benefits (Sorensen et al. 2004).


Working in some occupations can directly impact physical activity. Since the 1950s, many
workers have moved into occupations that are traditionally sedentary, whereas strenuous
occupations have become less so due to technological changes, leading to lower levels of
physical activity and higher levels of obesity (Brownson et al. 2005, Ladkawalla &
Philipson 2007). And although some have found that blue-collar workers who have more
physically demanding jobs are more likely to undertake more vigorous activity in their spare
time (Wu & Porell 2000), others have found that white-collar workers with the least
strenuous jobs are more likely to participate in vigorous activity outside of the workplace
and, as such, are more likely to retain their higher levels of activity even after retirement
(Berger et al. 2005). Consistent with that perspective, leisure time has increased in recent
decades, and low-status groups allocate a greater share of their time to sedentary activities
than do high-status groups (Berry 2007).


**Community Opportunities**

Communities shape opportunities to adopt and maintain healthy behaviors. Low-income
neighborhoods have more than their share of fast-food restaurants, liquor stores, and places
to buy cigarettes and have less than their share of large grocery stores with a wide selection
of healthy fresh foods. Some research finds that low-SES neighborhoods have greater or
equal access to gyms, parks, or recreation centers than high-SES neighborhoods, although
others find that high-SES neighborhoods have more attractive open spaces and free
recreation facilities, and greater access to beaches, rivers, golf courses, tennis courts, and
bike trails (Giles-Corti & Donovan 2002, Powell et al. 2006). Even when residents in lowSES neighborhoods have access to more recreational resources than residents in high-SES
neighborhoods, they tend to report lower perceived access to recreational facilities (GilesCorti & Donovan 2002). Poor communities and neighborhoods are targeted by tobacco
companies for outdoor advertising (Barbeau et al. 2004) and have weaker enforcement of
restrictions on sales of cigarettes to minors (Gemson et al. 1998). In contrast, affluent
communities are more likely to pass clean air laws that tend to lower smoking among highSES groups (Skeer et al. 2004).


Research from the United States and Canada (see Cummins & Macintyre 2006 for a review)
finds associations between obesity and food quality, prices, and availability in a community.
Persons in disadvantaged areas with less access to healthier foods also consume fewer fruits
and vegetables and have higher body weight (Cummins & Macintyre 2006). Inagami et al.
(2006) find a positive association between distance traveled to nearest grocery store and
weight. Similarly, Morland et al. (2006) report a lower prevalence of obesity and overweight
in neighborhoods with greater access to supermarkets.


But the effects of supermarket availability on SES differences in overweight and obesity are
inconsistent across nations. Studies from the United Kingdom and Australia find no
socioeconomic differences in food and supermarket availability, nor in fruit and vegetable
consumption (Cummins & Macintyre 2002, Pearson et al. 2005, Winkler et al. 2006). The
persistent relationship in the United States may result from high residential segregation in


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 12


cities and neighborhoods (Cummins & Macintyre 2006) and more pronounced inequalities
in the availability of high-quality foods. Evidence for fast-food outlet density and increased
weight is more consistent across countries. Studies from the United States, United Kingdom,
and Australia show increased numbers of fast-food outlets in poorer areas and propose a link
with the increased levels of obesity in disadvantaged neighborhoods (Cummins et al. 2005,
Maddock 2004, Reidpath et al. 2002).


Nevertheless, selection effects may operate. To some extent, grocery stores and restaurants
sell the food in most demand, cigarette companies market in neighborhoods with high
smoking, and physically active people locate closer to parks and amenities for exercise than
less active people. The literature has done more to demonstrate an association than to
establish causal direction (Freese & Lutfey 2010).


**Social Support, Social Cohesion, and Peer Influence**

Group membership—and the characteristics of individuals within communities—can affect
health behavior through two forms of social capital (Kawachi et al. 2008). First, networks of
health-oriented family members, relatives, friends, and neighbors support healthy behavior,
sanction unhealthy behavior, and exchange information on ways to change (Smith &
Christakis 2008). Given that high-SES persons adopt healthy behaviors and associate with
other high-SES persons, their networks of social support, influence, and engagement
promote health and widen disparities. Freese & Lutfey (2010) refer to spillover effects as the
influence that high-SES persons who care much about healthy behavior have on other highSES individuals who otherwise would care little about healthy behavior.


The effects of network social support on SES disparities in smoking emerge in several
studies. Cutler & Glaeser (2007) find a social multiplier impact of workplace smoking bans
where by workers who change their smoking behavior influence family and friends outside
the workplace to do the same. Such processes tend to occur more strongly among the highly
educated. Christakis & Fowler (2008) find that among friends who both had at least one year
of college, a decision by one friend to quit smoking decreased the chance of the other
smoking by 61%. Among friends with a high school education or less, no such influence
appeared. Interestingly, highly educated smokers who continue to smoke become less
central to their network than do less educated smokers.


Using national data from the United States, Boardman et al. (2005) show that persons living
in economically depressed areas and neighborhoods with high rates of obesity are more
likely to be obese, regardless of their individual characteristics. This suggests a type of
social contagion. Indeed, Christakis & Fowler’s (2007) analyses show that obesity can
follow social networking paths that influence persons and cement inequalities in obesity by
SES.


Although not couched in terms of social capital, a huge literature on teen smoking highlights
the importance of peer influences and group membership. The smoking of friends is perhaps
the strongest predictor of smoking among adolescents (Jacobson et al. 2001, p. 85).
Similarly, support from peers, parents, and siblings are important predictors of adolescents’
physical activity and drinking behaviors, as are opportunities and access to recreation
facilities or places to acquire alcohol ( Jessor et al. 2006, Sallis et al. 2000). In terms of
disparities, parental SES affects smoking among teens (Lindstrom 2008). However, teen
disparities based on parental SES are weaker than adult disparities based on own SES
( Jacobson et al. 2001, p. 93), suggesting that SES disparities in smoking crystallize and
strengthen after adolescence when disparities in social capital widen (Glendinning et al.
1994).


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 13


Second, social capital based on social cohesion helps explain community differences in
health behavior. Kawachi et al. (1999) define this form of social capital as encompassing
trust between citizens, norms of reciprocity, and group membership that facilitate
cooperation for mutual benefit. Social cohesion tends to be greater in high-SES
neighborhoods and to promote healthy behavior (Lindstrom 2008).


Studies offer mixed evidence of neighborhood and community effects on smoking. Ross
(2000) finds that neighborhood disadvantage increases the smoking of men but not of
women. Miles (2006) finds in a study of seven European cities that indicators of
neighborhood disorder such as litter, graffiti, and the lack of plants and flowers increase
smoking, again more for men than for women. Brown et al. (2006) find that community
social capital from religious groups reduces the number of cigarettes consumed, although
not the overall prevalence.


The importance of social capital for understanding the relationship between neighborhood
SES and exercise is ambiguous. Residents of disadvantaged neighborhoods are more likely
to walk to shops or work but are less likely to walk, bicycle, or participate in other sports for
leisure, even after adjusting for individual SES, in part because low-SES neighborhoods are
less safe and attractive (Giles-Corti & Donovan 2002, Ross 2000). Wen et al. (2007a) find
that an index of social capital is associated with regular exercise among neighborhood
residents in Chicago until adjusting for neighborhood SES, which suggests that the
relationship between neighborhood social capital and physical activity is either spurious or
mediated by neighborhood SES. But Wen et al. (2007b) find that neighborhood SES in
California is not associated with physical activity, although higher levels of neighborhood
social cohesion persistently predict increased physical activity.


Social cohesion is also linked to neighborhood obesity levels. For example, examining
adolescents in Los Angeles County, California, Cohen et al. (2006) find that neighborhood
SES is not significant in models of body mass and overweight after adjusting for
neighborhood collective efficacy. Burdette & Hill (2008) find in Texas that the relationship
between neighborhood disorder and obesity is entirely mediated by the psychological
distress associated with living in a disadvantaged neighborhood.


Although arguments about social capital and peer influence receive much attention, they are
incomplete. They do not explain the origins of SES differences in norms that support healthy
behavior or why social capital supports healthy behavior. If cohesive groups of high-SES
family members, friends, and neighbors who adopt healthy behaviors help others do the
same, then additional arguments are needed to account for the initial adoption of healthy
behaviors by high-SES groups. Other theories relating to motives and problem solving thus
remain crucial to arguments about social influence.


**DISCUSSION**


The literature has done little to systematically compare and contrast the mechanisms
reviewed here. This makes it difficult to offer an overarching framework that integrates or
adjudicates between the various approaches. We instead aimed more modestly to present
interrelated arguments in a way that helps organize previous work on health behaviors and
sets the stage for future research.


The very recent study by Cutler & Lleras-Muney (2010) represents a notable exception to
the lack of comparative research on mechanisms and evaluates numerous explanations of the
relationship of education and a variety of health behaviors using several data sets. Cutler &
Lleras-Muney (2010, p. 1) conclude that


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 14


income, health insurance, and family background can account for about 30 percent
of the gradient. Knowledge and measures of cognitive ability explain an additional
30 percent. Social networks account for another 10 percent. Our proxies for
discounting, risk aversion, or the value of future do not account for any of the
education gradient, and neither do personality factors such as a sense of control of
oneself or over one’s life.


Although their findings need replication with other data sets and measures, these
conclusions help organize and evaluate the diversity of causes and represent a valuable
starting point for future empirical research on SES disparities in health behaviors.


In addition, we can offer some thoughts on improvements in theory and method that go
beyond the current state of the field. In terms of theory, it may help to organize these
mechanisms by distinguishing between motives and means for health behavior (Freese &
Lutfey 2010). First, SES can affect the incentives or motivations for healthy behavior. LowSES groups may have less reason than high-SES groups to want to forego the short-term
pleasures of unhealthy behavior for long-term gain in longevity. Arguments related to stress,
limited benefits, class distinctions, and knowledge of risk each emphasize how SES shapes
motives for healthy behavior. High-SES groups face less stress that might encourage coping
through unhealthy behavior; they gain more longevity benefits from healthy behavior; they
accrue prestige by setting themselves apart with healthy behavior; and, although less clearly,
they have greater knowledge of risks to motivate healthy behavior.


Second, SES can affect the means to reach health goals. All SES groups may have similar
desires for healthy behavior, but low-SES groups have more difficulty in realizing their
goals. Arguments about efficacy in reaching goals for healthy behavior, access to aids for
healthy behavior, and community opportunities for healthy behavior focus more on SES
differences in resources for goal attainment. The distinction between motives and means
tends to blur at the edges, as strong motives increase efforts to find effective means, and
possessing scant means tends to sap motivation to change. Indeed, arguments about social
support and social capital tend to mix motives rather than emphasize one over the other.
However, motives and means are analytically distinct, and distinguishing among them may
aid in the study of disparities in health behaviors.


In terms of methods, the literature has done better in describing associations than in testing
specific causes. Designs that distinguish among the various mechanisms are not
straightforward. Creative efforts to measure stress, control for latent traits, and examine the
psychosocial benefits of schooling move in this direction, but studies can do more to
explicitly match mechanisms with measures. Future research could also do more to help
isolate the causal influence of education and related components of SES. Progress toward
these goals requires longitudinal studies with adequate controls for underlying
heterogeneity, well-measured mediators, and attention to the emergence of health behaviors
that begin early in life and accumulate over the life course. For example, with detailed data
on genetic, family, and school characteristics, the National Longitudinal Study of
[Adolescent Health (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth) offers opportunities to](http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth)
evaluate the mechanisms that link education to health behaviors early in life. Alternatively,
qualitative designs such as used by Lutfey & Freese (2005) in their study of diabetes clinics
can help us understand how the motives and means for healthy behavior differ by education
and SES.


Some insights may come from designs that compare health behaviors as well as the
determinants. Our review emphasizes the similarities among health behaviors, but each
behavior also has unique dimensions in terms of the time and effort required, the pleasure it
provides, and its social meanings. Whereas physical activity, sleep, and preparing nutritious


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 15


meals take a considerable amount of time, smoking and drinking practices seem less
constrained by temporal concerns. Modeling the different dimensions of health behaviors
has received the most sustained attention in the literature on physical activity—SES appears
to have different relationships with walking out of necessity (to work or to shops) than
walking for leisure. But the method of tobacco consumption (e.g., cigarettes, pipes, cigars),
the kinds of alcohol consumed (e.g., wine, beer, or spirits), the ingredients and food
preparation methods employed, or the contexts where food, tobacco, or alcohol is consumed
may also provide important insight into how the behaviors are linked to SES. Research that
compares measures from multiple theoretical perspectives across multiple health behaviors
could clarify when specific mechanisms are most important for shaping SES disparities in
health behaviors.


The approach of comparing health behaviors also applies to health care consumption. HighSES groups may see adoption of healthy behaviors and effective use of medical care as
closely linked in the pursuit of health (Ross & Mirowsky 2000). Medical care, which
depends greatly on access to insurance and relates directly to income and affluence, has
some similarities to lifestyle behaviors. Much as they affect smoking, exercise, and diet,
SES differences in knowledge, efficacy, and opportunities affect the willingness to use new
medical technologies (Glied & Lleras-Muney 2008) and follow treatment regimens laid out
by medical personnel (Lutfey & Freese 2005). Commitment to a healthy lifestyle could
encompass efforts to take full advantage of medical care resources and to avoid unhealthy
behaviors, and comparisons of the determinants of medical care usage and other behaviors
may offer new insights.


Focusing on historical trends in health behaviors may also illuminate the mechanisms that
link SES to health behaviors. First, the salience of mechanisms may change over time. For
example, high-SES individuals accumulate the most benefit from their knowledge, efficacy,
and resources in adopting innovative health-related behaviors and using emerging medical
technologies (Glied & Lleras-Muney 2008, Link 2008). In contrast, more widespread
publicity about and agreement on established risks (e.g., smoking) or common medical
treatments (e.g., cholesterol tests) tend to reduce the importance of SES differences in
knowledge. Second, the direction of the relationship between SES and health behaviors can
change over time. For example, high-status groups once had higher rates of tobacco use
(Pampel 2005), cocaine use (Miech 2008), and cholesterol (Chang & Lauderdale 2009).
Changes in the social meanings and circumstances affected the motives and means of highSES groups to reject these behaviors. However, changes can occur in the opposite direction.
Goldman & Lakdawalla (2005) find that the introduction of beta-blockers to treat
hypertension led to reduced disparities in hypertensive heart disease. In these cases, other
influences such as the ease of using new medicines and the willingness of clinicians to
prescribe them may overwhelm forces of stratification in health behaviors. Historical trends
can thus offer leverage in understanding changes in the mechanisms that link SES to health
behaviors and reversals in the relationship between SES and some health behaviors.


**Acknowledgments**


We received funding and administrative support for this work from the University of Colorado Population Center
(NICHD R21 HD051146), and thank Stefanie Mollborn, Richard Miech, and Bruce Link for helpful comments.


**LITERATURE CITED**


Adams J, White M. Time perspective in socioeconomic inequalities in smoking and body mass index.
Health Psychol. 2009; 28:83–90. [PubMed: 19210021]
Adler NE, Boyce T, Chesney MA, Cohen S, Folkman S, et al. Socioeconomic status and health: the
challenge of the gradient. Am. Psychol. 1994; 49:15–24. [PubMed: 8122813]


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 16


Barbeau EM, Krieger N, Soobader M-J. Working class matters: socioeconomic disadvantage, race/
ethnicity, gender, and smoking in NHIS 2000. Am. J. Public Health. 2004; 94:269–278. [PubMed:
14759942]
Bauer JE, Hyland A, Li Q, Steger C, Cummings KM. A longitudinal assessment of the impact of
smoke-free worksite policies on tobacco use. Am. J. Public Health. 2005; 95:1024–1029. [PubMed:
15914828]
Baum A, Garofalo JP, Yali AM. Socioeconomic status and chronic stress: Does stress account for SES
effects on health? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1999; 896:131–144. [PubMed: 10681894]
Becker GS, Grossman M, Murphy KM. An empirical analysis of cigarette addiction. Am. Econ. Rev.
1994; 84:396–418.
Becker GS, Murphy KM. A theory of rational addiction. J. Polit. Econ. 1988; 96:675–700.
Beckfield J. Does income inequality harm health? New cross-national evidence. J. Health Soc. Behav.
2004; 45 251-48.
Berger U, Der G, Mutrie N, Hannah MK. The impact of retirement on physical activity. Ageing Soc.
2005; 25:181–195.
Berry B. Disparities in free time inactivity in the United States: trends and explanations. Sociol.
Perspect. 2007; 50:177–208.
Biddle JE, Hamermesh DS. Sleep and the allocation of time. J. Polit. Econ. 1990; 98:922–943.
Björntorp P. Do stress reactions cause abdominal obesity and comorbidities? Obesity Rev. 2001; 2:73–
86.
Blaxter, M. Health and Lifestyles. London: Tavistock; 1990.
Bleich S, Blendon R, Adams A. Trust in scientific experts on obesity: implications for awareness and
behavior change. Obesity. 2007; 15:2145–2156. [PubMed: 17712134]
Boardman J, Saint Onge J, Rogers R, Denney J. Race differentials in obesity: the impact of place. J.
Health Soc. Behav. 2005; 46:229–243. [PubMed: 16259146]
Bourdieu, P. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ.
Press; 1984.
Brown TT, Scheffler RM, Seo S, Reed M. The empirical relationship between community social
capital and the demand for cigarettes. Health Econ. 2006; 15:1159–1172. [PubMed: 16615038]
Brownson RC, Boehmer TK, Like DA. Declining rates of physical activity in the United States: What
are the contributors? Annu. Rev. Public Health. 2005; 26:421–443. [PubMed: 15760296]
Burdette A, Hill T. An examination of processes linking perceived neighborhood disorder and obesity.
Soc. Sci. Med. 2008; 67:38–46. [PubMed: 18433964]
Chang VW, Christakis NA. Income inequality and weight status in US metropolitan areas. Soc. Sci.
Med. 2005; 61:83–96. [PubMed: 15847964]
Chang VW, Lauderdale DS. Fundamental cause theory, technological innovation, and health
disparities: the case of cholesterol in the era of statins. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2009; 50:245–261.

[PubMed: 19711804]
Chou S-Y, Grossman M, Saffer H. An economic analysis of adult obesity: results from the Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System. J. Health Econ. 2004; 23:565–587. [PubMed: 15120471]
Christakis N, Fowler J. The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years. New Engl. J.
Med. 2007; 357:370–379. [PubMed: 17652652]
Christakis NA, Fowler JH. The collective dynamics of smoking in a large social network. New Engl. J.
Med. 2008; 358:2249–2258. [PubMed: 18499567]
Cockerham WC. Health lifestyle theory and the convergence of agency and structure. J. Health Soc.
Behav. 2005; 46:51–67. [PubMed: 15869120]
Cohen D, Finch B, Bower A, Sastry N. Collective efficacy and obesity: the potential influence of
social factors on health. Soc. Sci. Med. 2006; 62:769–778. [PubMed: 16039767]
Colby JP Jr, Linsky AS, Straus MA. Social stress and state-to-state differences in smoking and
smoking-related mortality in the United States. Soc. Sci. Med. 1994; 38:373–381. [PubMed:
8140464]
Cummins S, Macintyre S. A systematic study of an urban foodscape: the price and availability of food
in Greater Glasgow. Urban Stud. 2002; 39:2115–2130.


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 17


Cummins S, Macintyre S. Food environments and obesity—neighborhood or nation? Int. J. Epidemiol.
2006; 35:100–104. [PubMed: 16338945]
Cummins S, McKay L, Macintyre S. McDonald’s restaurants and neighborhood deprivation in
Scotland & England. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2005; 4:308–310. [PubMed: 16242594]
Cutler, DM.; Glaeser, EL. Social interactions and smoking. Harvard Inst. Econ. Res. Disc. Pap. No.
[2153, Harvard Univ.; 2007. http://www.economics.harvard.edu/pub/hier/2008/HIER2153.pdf](http://www.economics.harvard.edu/pub/hier/2008/HIER2153.pdf)
Cutler DM, Glaeser EL, Shapiro JM. Why have Americans become more obese? J. Econ. Perspect.
2003; 17:93–118.
Cutler, DM.; Lleras-Muney, A. Education and health: evaluating theories and evidence. In: Schoeni,
RF.; House, JS.; Kaplan, GA.; Pollack, H., editors. Making Americans Healthier: Social and
Economic Policy as Health Policy. New York: Russell Sage Found; 2008. p. 29-60.
Cutler DM, Lleras-Muney A. Understanding differences in health behaviors by education. J. Health
Econ. 2010; 29(1):1–28. [PubMed: 19963292]
Dallman M, Pecoraro N, Akana S, la Fleur S, Gomez F, et al. Chronic stress and obesity: a new view
of comfort food. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2003; 100:11696–11701. [PubMed: 12975524]
DeCicca P, Kenkel DS, Mathios AD. Putting out the fires: Will higher taxes reduce the onset of youth
smoking? J. Polit. Econ. 2002; 110:144–169.
de Walque D. Does education affect smoking behaviors? Evidence using the Vietnam draft as an
instrument for college education. J. Health Econ. 2007; 26:877–895. [PubMed: 17275938]
Drewnowski A. Obesity and the food environment: dietary energy density and diet costs. Am. J. Prev.
Med. 2004; 27:154–162. [PubMed: 15450626]
Droomers M, Schrijvers CTM, Van De Mheen H, Mackenbach JP. Educational differences in leisuretime physical inactivity: a descriptive and explanatory study. Soc. Sci. Med. 1998; 47:1665–1676.

[PubMed: 9877337]
Duncan C, Jones K, Moon G. Smoking and deprivation: Are there neighbourhood effects? Soc. Sci.
Med. 1999; 48:497–505. [PubMed: 10075175]
Eibner C, Evans WN. Relative deprivation, poor health habits, and mortality. J. Hum. Resour. 2005;
40:591–620.
Emmons KM, Wechsler H, Dowdall G, Abraham M. Predictors of smoking among U.S. college
students. Am. J. Public Health. 1998; 88:104–107. [PubMed: 9584013]
Fagan P, Shavers V, Lawrence D, Gibson JT, Ponder P. Cigarette smoking and quitting behaviors
among unemployed adults in the United States. Nicotine Tob. Res. 2007; 9:241–248. [PubMed:
17365755]
Farrell P, Fuchs VR. Schooling and health: the cigarette connection. J. Health Econ. 1982; 1:217–230.

[PubMed: 10263956]
Farrelly MC, Bray J. Response to increases in cigarette prices by race/ethnicity, income, and age
groups—United States, 1976–1993. MMWR. 1998; 47:605–609. [PubMed: 9699809]
Freese, J.; Lutfey, K. Fundamental causality: challenges of an animating concept for medical
sociology. In: Pescosolido, B.; Martin, J.; McLeod, J.; Rogers, A., editors. Handbook of the
Sociology of Health, Illness, and Healing. New York: Springer; 2010. In press
Fuchs, VR. Time preference and health: an exploratory study. In: Fuchs, VR., editor. Economic
Aspects of Health. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press; 1982. p. 93-120.
Gallet CA, List JA. Cigarette demand: a metaanalysis of elasticities. Health Econ. 2003; 12:821–835.

[PubMed: 14508867]
Gemson D, Moats H, Watkins B, Ganz M, Robinson S, Healton E. Laying down the law: reducing
illegal tobacco sales to minors in central Harlem. Am. J. Public Health. 1998; 88:936–939.

[PubMed: 9618624]
Giles-Corti B, Donovan RJ. Socioeconomic status differences in recreational physical activity levels
and real and perceived access to a supportive physical environment. Prev. Med. 2002; 35:601–611.

[PubMed: 12460528]
Glendinning A, Shucksmith J, Hendry L. Social class and adolescent smoking behavior. Soc. Sci.
Med. 1994; 38:1449–1460. [PubMed: 8023194]


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 18


Glied S, Lleras-Muney A. Technological innovation and inequality in health. Demography. 2008;
45:741–761. [PubMed: 18939670]
Goldman DP, Lakdawalla DN. A theory of health disparities and medical technology. Contrib. Econ.
Anal. Policy. 2005; 4:1–30.
Gottfredson LS. Intelligence: Is it the epidemiologists’ elusive “fundamental cause” of social class
inequalities in health? J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 2004; 86:174–199.
Gottfredson, MR.; Hirschi, T. A General Theory of Crime. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press; 1990.
Graham H. Cigarette smoking: a light on gender and class inequality in Britain? J. Soc. Policy. 1995;
24:509–527.
Grunberg L, Moore S, Greenberg ES. Work stress and self-reported alcohol use: the moderating role of
escapist reasons for drinking. J. Occup. Health Psychol. 1999; 4:29–36. [PubMed: 10100111]
Grzywacz JG, Almeida DM, Neupert SD, Ettner SL. Socioeconomic status and health: a microlevel
analysis of exposure and vulnerability to daily stressors. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2004; 45:1–16.

[PubMed: 15179904]
Hadley J. Sicker and poorer—the consequences of being uninsured: a review of the research on the
relationship between health insurance, medical care use, health, work, and income. Med. Care Res.
Rev. 2003; 60:3S–75S. [PubMed: 12800687]
Harper S, Lynch J. Trends in socioeconomic inequalities in adult health behaviors among U.S. states,
1990–2004. Public Health Rep. 2007; 122:177–189. [PubMed: 17357360]
Hesse-Biber, S. The Cult of Thinness. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press; 2007.
Hirschi, T.; Gottfredson, MR., editors. The Generality of Deviance. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction;
1994.
Honjo K, Tsutsumi A, Kawachi I, Kawakami N. What accounts for the relationship between social
class and smoking cessation? Results of a path analysis. Soc. Sci. Med. 2006; 62:317–328.

[PubMed: 16039765]
Howard-Pitney B, Winkleby M, Albright C, Bruce B, Fortmann S. The Stanford Nutrition Action
Program: a dietary fat intervention for low-literacy adults. Am. J. Public Health. 1997; 87:1971–
1976. [PubMed: 9431286]
Howell FM, McKenzie JA. High school athletics and adult sport-leisure activity: gender variations
across the life cycle. Sociol. Sport J. 1987; 4:329–346.
Inagami S, Cohen D, Finch B, Asch S. You are where you shop: grocery store locations, weight, and
neighborhoods. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2006; 31:10–17. [PubMed: 16777537]
Jacobson, PD.; Lantz, P.; Warner, K.; Wasserman, J.; Pollack, H.; Ahlstrom, A. Combating Teen
Smoking: Research and Policy Strategies. Ann Arbor: Univ. Mich. Press; 2001.
Jessor R, Costa FM, Krueger PM, Turbin MS. A developmental study of high-volume drinking among
college students: the role of psychosocial and behavioral protective and risk factors. J. Stud.
Alcohol. 2006; 67:86–94. [PubMed: 16536132]
Jha P, Peto R, Zatonski W, Boreham J, Jarvis MJ, Lopez AD. Social inequalities in male mortality, and
in male mortality from smoking: indirect estimation from national death rates in England and
Wales, Poland, and North America. Lancet. 2006; 368:367–370. [PubMed: 16876664]
Johnson RA, Hoffman JP. Adolescent cigarette smoking in U.S. racial/ethnic subgroups: findings from
the National Education Longitudinal Study. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2000; 41:392–407. [PubMed:
11198564]
Kan K, Tsai W. Obesity and risk knowledge. J. Health Econ. 2004; 23:907–934. [PubMed: 15353186]
Kawachi I, Kennedy BP, Glass R. Social capital and self-rated health: a contextual analysis. Am. J.
Public Health. 1999; 89:1187–1193. [PubMed: 10432904]
Kawachi, I.; Subramanian, SV.; Kim, D., editors. Social Capital and Health. New York: Springer;
2008.
Krueger PM, Chang V. Being poor and coping with stress: health behaviors and the risk of death. Am.
J. Public Health. 2008; 98:889–896. [PubMed: 18382003]
Krueger PM, Friedman EM. Sleep duration in the United States: a cross-sectional population based
study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2009; 169:134–141.
Ladkawalla D, Philipson TJ. Labor supply and weight. J. Hum. Resour. 2007; 42:85–116.


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 19


Lang I, Gardener E, Huppert FA, Melzer D. Was John Reid right? Smoking, class, and pleasure: a
population-based cohort study in England. Public Health. 2007; 121:518–524. [PubMed:
17337283]
Lantz PM, House JS, Lepkowski JM, Williams DR, Mero RP, Chen J. Socioeconomic factors, health
behaviors, and mortality: results from a nationally representative prospective study of U.S. adults.
JAMA. 1998; 279:1703–1708. [PubMed: 9624022]
Lantz PM, House JS, Mero RP, Williams DR. Stress, life events, and socioeconomic disparities in
health: results from the Americans’ Changing Lives Study. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2005; 46:274–
288. [PubMed: 16259149]
Lawlor DA, Frankel S, Shaw M, Ebrahim S, Smith GD. Smoking and ill health: Does lay
epidemiology explain the failure of smoking cessation programs among deprived populations?
Am. J. Public Health. 2003; 93:266–270. [PubMed: 12554581]
Layte R, Whelan CT. Explaining social class inequalities in smoking: the role of education, selfefficacy, and deprivation. Eur. Sociol. Rev. 2009; 25:399–410.
Lillard DR, Plassmann V, Kenkel D, Mathios A. Who kicks the habit and how they do it:
socioeconomic differences across methods of quitting smoking in the USA. Soc. Sci. Med. 2007;
64:2504–2519. [PubMed: 17418470]
Lindstrom, M. Social capital and health-related behaviors. In: Kawachi, I.; Subramanian, SV.; Kim,
D., editors. Social Capital and Health. New York: Springer; 2008. p. 215-238.
Link BG. Epidemiological sociology and the social shaping of population health. J. Health Soc. Behav.
2008; 49:367–384. [PubMed: 19181044]
Link BG, Northridge ME, Phelan JC, Ganz ML. Social epidemiology and the fundamental cause
concept: on the structuring of effective cancer screens by socioeconomic status. Milbank Q. 1998;
76:375–402. [PubMed: 9738168]
Link BG, Phelan J. Social conditions as fundamental causes of disease. J. Health Soc. Behav.
1995:80–94. Extra Issue. [PubMed: 7560851]
Link BG, Phelan J, Miech R, Westin EL. The resources that matter: fundamental social causes of
health disparities and the challenge of intelligence. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2008; 49:72–91.

[PubMed: 18418986]
Lutfey K, Freese J. Toward some fundamentals of fundamental causality: socioeconomic status and
health in the routine clinic visit for diabetes. Am. J. Sociol. 2005; 110:1326–1372.
Lynch JW, Kaplan GA, Salonen JT. Why do poor people behave poorly? Variation in adult health
behaviours and psychosocial characteristics by stages of the socioeconomic lifecourse. Soc. Sci.
Med. 1997; 44:809–819. [PubMed: 9080564]
Lyons, L. Older Americans: sleep “doze” a body good. Gallup. 2005 Dec 13.
[http://www.gallup.com/poll/20434/Older-Americans-Sleep-Doze-Body-Good.aspx](http://www.gallup.com/poll/20434/Older-Americans-Sleep-Doze-Body-Good.aspx)
Maddock J. The relationship between obesity and the prevalence of fast-food restaurants: state-level
analysis. Am. J. Health Promot. 2004; 19:137–143. [PubMed: 15559714]
Manley MW, Griffin T, Foldes SS, Link CC, Sechrist RAJ. The role of health plans in tobacco control.
Annu. Rev. Public Health. 2003; 23:237–266.
Marmot, M. The Status Syndrome: How Social Standing Affects Our Health and Longevity. New
York: Times Books/Henry Holt; 2004.
Marmot M. Smoking and inequalities. Lancet. 2006; 368:341–342. [PubMed: 16876643]
Marsh, A.; McKay, S. Poor Smokers. London: Policy Stud. Inst; 1994.
McEwen B. Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. New Engl. J. Med. 1998; 338:171–
179. [PubMed: 9428819]
McLaren L. Socioeconomic status and obesity. Epidemiol. Rev. 2007; 29:29–48. [PubMed: 17478442]
McLaren L, Kuh D. Women’s body dissatisfaction, social class, and social mobility. Soc. Sci. Med.
2004; 58:1575–1584. [PubMed: 14990360]
Miech R. The formation of a socioeconomic health disparity: the case of cocaine use during the 1980s
and 1990s. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2008; 49:352–366. [PubMed: 18771068]


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 20


Miech R, Kumanyika S, Stettler N, Link B, Phelan J, Chang V. Trends in the association of poverty
with overweight among US adolescents, 1971–2004. JAMA. 2006; 295:2385–2393. [PubMed:
16720824]
Miles R. Neighborhood disorder and smoking: findings of a European urban survey. Soc. Sci. Med.
2006; 63:2464–2475. [PubMed: 16904800]
Mirowsky, J.; Ross, CE. Education, Social Status, and Health. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine De Gruyter;
2003.
Mirowsky J, Ross CE. Life course trajectories of perceived control and their relationship to education.
Am. J. Sociol. 2007; 112:1339–1382.
Monteiro C, Moura E, Conde W, Popkin B. Socioeconomic status and obesity in adult populations of
developing countries: a review. Bull. World Health Organ. 2004; 82:940–946. [PubMed:
15654409]
Moore PJ, Adler NE, Williams DR, Jackson JS. Socioeconomic status and health: the role of sleep.
Psychosomat. Med. 2002; 64:337–344.
Morland K, Diez Roux A, Wing S. Supermarkets, other food stores, and obesity: the Atherosclerosis
Risk in Communities Study. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2006; 30:333–339. [PubMed: 16530621]
Mullahy, J.; Robert, SA. No time to lose? Time constraints and physical activity. Cambridge, MA:
[NBER Work. Pap. 14513, Natl. Bur. Econ. Res.; 2008. http://www.nber.org/papers/w14513.pdf](http://www.nber.org/papers/w14513.pdf)
National Center for Health Statistics. National Health Interview Survey. Atlanta, GA: Cent. Dis. Cont.
[Prev; 2008. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm](http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm)
Ng DM, Jeffery RW. Relationships between perceived stress and health behaviors in a sample of
working adults. Health Psychol. 2003; 22:638–642. [PubMed: 14640862]
Niederdeppe J, Fiore MC, Baker TB, Smith SS. Smoking-cessation media campaigns and their
effectiveness among socioeconomically advantaged and disadvantaged populations. Am. J.
Public Health. 2008; 98:916–924. [PubMed: 18381998]
Niederdeppe J, Levy AG. Fatalistic beliefs about cancer prevention and three prevention behaviors.
Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 2007; 16:998–1003.
Paeratakul S, White M, Williamson D, Ryan D, Bray G. Sex, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and
BMI in relation to self-perception of overweight. Obesity Res. 2002; 10:345–350.
Pampel FC. Inequality, diffusion, and the status gradient in smoking. Soc. Probl. 2002; 49:35–57.
Pampel FC. Diffusion, cohort change, and social patterns of smoking. Soc. Sci. Res. 2005; 34:117–
139.
Pampel FC. Socioeconomic distinction, cultural tastes, and cigarette smoking. Soc. Sci. Q. 2006;
87:19–35. [PubMed: 21874073]
Pampel FC. The persistence of educational disparities in smoking. Soc. Probl. 2009; 56:526–542.
Pampel FC, Rogers RG. Socioeconomic status, smoking, and health: a test of competing theories of
cumulative advantage. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2004; 45:306–321. [PubMed: 15595509]
Parrott AC. Does cigarette smoking cause stress? Am. Psychol. 1999; 54:817–820. [PubMed:
10540594]
Paternoster R, Brame R. The structural similarity of processes generating criminal and analogous
behaviors. Criminology. 1998; 36:633–669.
Pearlin LI. The sociological study of stress. J. Health Soc. Behav. 1989; 30:241–256. [PubMed:
2674272]
Pearson T, Russell J, Campbell M, Barker M. Do “food-deserts” influence fruit and vegetable
consumption—a cross-sectional study. Appetite. 2005; 45:195–197. [PubMed: 15927303]
Phelan JC, Link BG, Diez-Roux A, Kawachi I, Levin B. “Fundamental causes” of social inequalities in
mortality: a test of the theory. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2004; 45:265–285. [PubMed: 15595507]
Powell LM, Slater S, Chaloupka FJ, Harper D. Availability of physical activity-related facilities and
neighborhood demographic and socioeconomic characteristics: a national study. Am. J. Public
Health. 2006; 96:1676–1680. [PubMed: 16873753]
Reidpath D, Burns C, Garrard J, Mahoney M, Townsend M. An ecological study of the relationship
between social and environmental determinants of obesity. Health Place. 2002; 8:141–145.

[PubMed: 11943585]


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 21


Rogers, EM. Diffusion of Innovations. 5th ed. New York: Free Press; 2003.
Rogers, RG.; Hummer, RA.; Nam, CB. Living and Dying in the USA: Behavioral, Health, and Social
Differentials of Adult Mortality. San Diego, CA: Academic; 2000.
Ross CE. Walking, exercise, and smoking: Does neighborhood matter? Soc. Sci. Med. 2000; 51:265–
274. [PubMed: 10832573]
Ross CE, Mirowsky J. Does medical insurance contribute to socioeconomic differentials in health?
Milbank Q. 2000; 78:291–321. [PubMed: 10934995]
Saad, L. Many Americans still downplay risk of passive smoking. Gallup. 2006 July 21.
[http://www.gallup.com/poll/23851/Many-Americans-Still-Downplay-Risk-Passive-](http://www.gallup.com/poll/23851/Many-Americans-Still-Downplay-Risk-Passive-Smoking.aspx)
[Smoking.aspx](http://www.gallup.com/poll/23851/Many-Americans-Still-Downplay-Risk-Passive-Smoking.aspx)
Sallis JF, Prochaska JJ, Taylor WC. A review of correlates of physical activity ofchildren and
adolescents. Med. Sci. Sport Exerc. 2000; 32:963–975.
Salmon P. Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression, and sensitivity to stress: a unifying
theory. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 2001; 21:33–61. [PubMed: 11148895]
Scheerder J, Vanreusel B, Taks M, Renson R. Social sports stratification in Flanders 1969–1999: intergenerational reproduction of social inequalities. Int. J. Sociol. Sport. 2002; 37:219–245.
Schieman S, Kurashina Whitestone Y, Van Gundy K. The nature of work and the stress of higher
status. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2006; 47:242–257. [PubMed: 17066775]
Schnittker J, McLeod JD. The social psychology of health disparities. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 2005; 31:75–
103.
Siahpush M, Borland R, Taylor J, Singh GK, Ansari Z, Serraglio A. The association of smoking with
perception of income inequality, relative material well-being, and social capital. Soc. Sci. Med.
2006a; 63:2801–2812. [PubMed: 16971030]
Siahpush M, McNeil A, Hammond D, Fong GT. Socioeconomic and country variations in knowledge
of health risks of tobacco smoking and toxic constituents of smoke: results from the 2002
International Tobacco Control (ITC) Four Country Survey. Tob. Control. 2006b; 15
Skeer M, George S, Hamilton WL, Cheng DM, Siegel M. Town-level characteristics and smoking
policy adoption in Massachusetts: Are local restaurant smoking regulations fostering disparities
in health protection? Am. J. Public Health. 2004; 94:286–292. [PubMed: 14759944]
Smith DR, Leggat PA. An international review of tobacco smoking in the medical profession: 1974–
2004. BMC Public Health. 2007; 7:1–12. [PubMed: 17199891]
Smith, H. The high cost of smoking. MSN Money. 2008 Sept 3.
[http://articles.moneycentral.msn.com/Insurance/InsureYourHealth/HighCostOfSmoking.aspx](http://articles.moneycentral.msn.com/Insurance/InsureYourHealth/HighCostOfSmoking.aspx)
Smith KP, Christakis NA. Social networks and health. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 2008; 34:405–429.
Sobal J, Stunkard A. Socioeconomic status and obesity: a review of the literature. Psychol. Bull. 1989;
105:260–275. [PubMed: 2648443]
Sorensen G, Barbeau E, Hunt MK, Emmons K. Reducing social disparities in tobacco use: a socialcontextual model for reducing tobacco use among blue-collar workers. Am. J. Public Health.
2004; 94:230–239. [PubMed: 14759932]
Stempel C. Adult participation in sports as cultural capital: a test of Bourdieu’s theory of the field of
sports. Int. Rev. Sociol. Sport. 2005; 40:411–432.
Sterling T, Weinkam J. The confounding of occupation and smoking and its consequences. Soc. Sci.
Med. 1990; 30:457–467. [PubMed: 2315728]
Stuber J, Galea S, Link BG. Smoking and the emergence of a stigmatized social status. Soc. Sci. Med.
2008; 67:420–430. [PubMed: 18486291]
Thoits PA. Personal agency in the stress process. J. Health Soc. Behav. 2006; 47:309–324. [PubMed:
17240922]
Thomas S, Fayter D, Misso K, Ogilvie D, Petticrew M, et al. Population tobacco control interventions
and their effects on social inequalities in smoking: systematic review. Tob. Control. 2008;
17:230–237. [PubMed: 18426867]
Thun MJ, Peto R, Lopez AD, Monaco JH, Henley SJ, et al. Alcohol consumption and mortality among
middle-aged and elderly U.S. adults. New Engl. J. Med. 1997; 337:1705–1714. [PubMed:
9392695]


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 22


Vangeli E, West R. Sociodemographic differences in triggers to quit smoking: findings from a national
survey. Tob. Control. 2008; 17:410–415. [PubMed: 18784155]
Veblen, T. Theory of the Leisure Class. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction; 1992 [1899].
Viscusi WK, Hakes JK. Risk beliefs and smoking behavior. Econ. Inq. 2008; 46:45–59.
Warner, K. Tobacco policy in the United States: lessons for the obesity epidemic. In: Mechanic, D.;
Rogut, LB.; Colby, DC., editors. Policy Challenges in Modern Health Care. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers Univ. Press; 2005. p. 99-114.
Wen M, Browning CR, Cagney KA. Neighborhood deprivation, social capital and regular exercise
during adulthood: a multilevel study in Chicago. Urban Stud. 2007a; 44:2651–2671.
Wen M, Kandula NR, Lauderdale DS. Walking for transportation or leisure: What difference does the
neighborhood make? J. Gen. Intern. Med. 2007b; 22:1674–1680. [PubMed: 17932724]
Wilkinson, RG. Unhealthy Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality. London: Routledge; 1996.
Wilson TC. The paradox of social class and sports involvement: the roles of cultural and economic
capital. Int. Rev. Sociol. Sport. 2002; 37:5–16.
Winkler E, Turrell G, Paterson C. Does living in a disadvantaged area mean fewer opportunities to
purchase fresh fruit and vegetables in the area? Findings from the Brisbane Food Study. Health
Place. 2006; 12:306–319. [PubMed: 16546696]
Wray LA, Herzog AR, Willis RJ, Wallace RB. The impact of education and heart attack on smoking
cessation in middle-aged adults. J. Health Soc. Behav. 1998; 39:271–294. [PubMed: 9919852]
Wu B, Porell F. Job characteristics and leisure physical activity. J. Aging Health. 2000; 12:538–559.

[PubMed: 11503731]
Zhang Q, Wang Y. Trends in the association between obesity and socioeconomic status in U.S. adults:
1971 to 2000. Obesity Res. 2004; 12:1622–1632.


_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


Pampel et al. Page 23

|Controls for other SES variables|BMI obese|Education (years)|1.5*|1.5*|1.5*|1.0|Occupation|1.2|1.4*|1.2|1.0|Income|1.2|1.0|1.1|1.0|Unemployed|1.0|1.0|Housing|0.9|1.0|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Controls for other SES variables**|**No exercise**|**No exercise**|2.8_*_|2.1_*_|1.4_*_|1.0|1.0|1.7_*_|1.2|1.2|1.0|1.0|1.9_*_|1.6_*_|1.2|1.0|1.0|0.7_*_|1.0|1.0|1.1|1.0|
|**Controls for other SES variables**|**Currently**<br>**smokes**|**Currently**<br>**smokes**|2.9_*_|2.4_*_|2.1_*_|1.0|1.0|1.2|1.1|1.1|1.0|1.0|1.5_*_|1.1|1.0|1.0|1.0|1.6_*_|1.0|1.0|1.5_*_|1.0|
|**No controls for other SES variables**|**BMI obese**|**BMI obese**|1.8_*_|1.8_*_|1.6_*_|1.0|1.0|1.5_*_|1.7_*_|1.4_*_|1.0|1.0|1.5_*_|1.2|1.3_*_|1.0|1.0|0.2_*_|1.0|1.0|1.1|1.0|
|**No controls for other SES variables**|**No exercise**|**No exercise**|4.9_*_|3.2_*_|1.8_*_|1.0|1.0|3.1_*_|2.0_*_|1.7_*_|1.0|1.0|3.4_*_|2.3_*_|1.6_*_|1.0|1.0|0.7_*_|1.0|1.0|1.5_*_|1.0|
|**No controls for other SES variables**|**Currently**<br>**smokes**|**Currently**<br>**smokes**|3.7_*_|2.7_*_|2.3_*_|1.0|1.0|2.2_*_|1.9_*_|1.6_*_|1.0|1.0|2.6_*_|1.5_*_|1.4_*_|1.0|1.0|1.6_*_|1.0|1.0|1.9_*_|1.0|
||**SES Variables**|**SES Variables**|0–11|12|13–15|16+|16+|Labor-Farm|Protect-Service|Admin-Sales|Prof-Manager|Prof-Manager|Low|Middle low|Middle high|High|High|Yes|No|No|Rent|Own|



_Annu Rev Sociol_ . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 9.


