Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 BMC Public Health
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-023-16961-5

## **RESEARCH Open Access**

# Barriers to implementing health programs based on community participation: the Q method derived perspectives of healthcare professional


Hassan Mahmoodi [1,2], Amjad Mohamadi Bolbanabad [1*], Abdolreza Shaghaghi [3], Mehdi Zokaie [4],
Reza Ghanei Gheshlagh [1] and Abdorrahim Afkhamzadeh [1]


**Abstract**
**Background** Community participation in implementing health programs leads to positive organizational, social and
individual consequences. This study aimed to investigate the prospects of a sample of Iranian healthcare professionals
about their perceived barriers to implementing health programs based on community participation.
**Methods** This was a cross-sectional study that employed a Q-methodology approach. Twenty health professional
sorted the 47 statements into a 9-column Q-sort diagram ranging from − 4 as not important to + 4 as very important.
The data were analyzed with PQMethod 2.35 software. The centroid factor analysis and varimax rotation were used
for data analysis. Factors identified were interpreted and described in terms of the participants perspectives on the
phenomenon.
**Results** Analysis of the study participants’ viewpoints (the Q-sorts) resulted in a five factor solution (accounted
for 57% of the total variance) to endorse the main barriers to the implementation of health programs based
on community participation in Iran. Barriers related to government, health programs, lack of necessary skills
amongst health professionals and weak coordination between departments, barriers related to community, lack of
understanding of goals, benefits and transparency of roles and responsibilities were among the important emanated
factors to implementing health programs based community participation.
**Conclusion** Health policymakers and managers should consider the five mentioned identified barriers based on the
community when planning and implementing the health program participation and try to empower the community
to implement the programs in Iran.
**Keywords** Barriers, Health program, Community, Participation, Q methodology



*Correspondence:
Amjad Mohamadi Bolbanabad
amohammadi1364@gmail.com
1Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Research Institute for
Health Development, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj,
Iran



2Department of Vice Chancellor for Health Affairs, Health Education and
Promotion Group, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran
3Department of Health Education and Promotion, Faculty of Health, Tabriz
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran
4Department of Vice Chancellor for Health Affairs, Population, Family and
School Health Group, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj,
Iran



© The Author(s) 2023. **Open Access** This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use,
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
[need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)
in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 2 of 9



**Background**
The concept of social participation and community
empowerment is derived from the World Health Organization (WHO)’s strategy of health for all by 20,000 and
the Ottawa charter for health promotion [1, 2] which was
approved by the countries of the world at the Alma-Ata
declaration in 1978 [3] and in the subsequent Jakarta declaration of the WHO focused on increasing the capacity
and community empowerment, and community participation was placed as one of the most important principles of primary health care, and it was emphasized
that community members should be actively involved in
diagnosis, making decisions and solutions, implementation, and evaluation of health problems [4]. In addition,
community participation in the planning, implementing, and monitoring of health programs is critical to
prevent community disagreement, and assurance agreement on health services, which would contribute to the
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030 [5].
The WHO believes that participation in health is a type
of cooperation in which people voluntarily or because of
encouragement and justifications accept to interact with
health-related interventions and gain benefits by providing labor or other needed resources. On the other hand,
participation is also considered as empowerment through
which the local community learns responsibility, diagnosis and work to solve their health problems and strives for
the development of their community [6].

The concept of participation in health basically originates from the people-centered approach in development
measures, and it brings to mind that in order to promote health, one should be committed to the principle
of “with the people and not for the people” and based on
this, adopt strategies that It should be based on people’s
involvement in social affairs and urban health [7]. Along
with the international community, the Islamic Republic
of Iran accepted community participation as a principle
in providing health services. Many programs and projects such as “Health Liaison Plan”, “Health Ambassadors
Training Plan” for the implementation of the national
self-care program, “Polio Eradication Mobilization Plan”,
“Village Environment Improvement Mobilization Plan”,
and “Country Health Benefactors Assembly” for Increasing community participation has been implemented in
Iran [8, 9].

The results of some studies show that these plans have
effects such as increasing the awareness and health literacy of the community, increasing the commitment of
the community in participating in self-care programs,
increasing the number of people visiting health centers,
and increasing community participation in the construction and equipping of health centers [8, 10]. Also, community participation in implementing health programs



leads to positive organizational, social and individual
consequences [11].

The results of some studies in the world show that the
implementation of health programs based on community
participation, increase the benefit or demand for health
care and treatment, and increase community awareness

[12, 13]. Also, it decreases some challenges and barriers
that this community was faced including the instability
of financial, human and informational resources, and the
low participation of some local communities [14, 15]. On
the other hand, a review of literature in developed countries shows that the barriers of implementation of health
programs based on community participation are related
to factors such as the context of that community, infrastructural and processes factors [16].

Q-methodology is one way to identify barriers regarding health promotion programs through perspective of
healthcare professional [17]. Q methodology combines
and benefits from qualitative and quantitative research
methods to systematically explore and describe the range
of viewpoints about a topic and is therefore regarded a
‘mixed method or a ‘qualiquantological method’ [18]. Q
methodology allows researchers to identify the underlying factors or dimensions that shape people’s views and
attitudes, and to explore how these factors relate to each
other. This can lead to a more nuanced understanding of
complex issues, as well as the identification of patterns
and commonalities across different groups or individuals

[19]. Overall, Q methodology offers a unique and valuable approach to studying subjective experiences and
perceptions, and has the potential to generate insights
that may not be captured by more traditional research
methods [20]. Studies show the increasing use of Q
methodology in health care research [21, 22].

Thus, regarding the importance of the topic and the
role of people’s participation in the implementation of
the health program in Iran, especially in households,
house health centers and comprehensive health service
centers, the challenges of community participation in
Iran have not yet been evaluated from the perspectives
of health professionals, so The purpose of this study is to
identify challenges from the perspectives of health professionals using a combined method (Q Methodology).


**Method**
This cross-sectional study was conducted using the Q
methodology during the following 6 steps using Berry
and Props method [23] during the following steps.


**First and second stage: defining the discourse space**
At this stage, the discourse space was formed by defining the topic or study idea. The views presented about the
topic raised for the discourse space can be formed from
a review of the texts and experts in this field [23]. In this


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 3 of 9



study, the topic and idea raised for the discourse space
was to identify challenges and strategies to improve the
level of responsiveness of the health system in Iran. The
discourse space included a collection of diverse materials related to the research topic, which were discussed
among the people of the discourse. The people of discourse were the people whose mentalities regarding the
research topic were identified by using the Q method

[24]. In this study, the interviewees (sample of people)
included health professionals in the Health Vice-Chancellor of Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, who
had previous knowledge about the challenges and strategies to improve the level of responsiveness of the health
system in Iran.

At this stage, the health professionals who were present in the discourse (interviews) were selected as a sample of people to participate in the Q study, sorting stage.
The sampling was purposeful and that the participants
are selected based on having a special relationship with
the subject of study (community participation) or having
prior knowledge about it. The number of sample people
in Q method to sort the phrases should be less than the
number of phrases around the subject under study (typically 1 participant for every 3–5 statements) [20, 25]. In
this study, based on final 47 phrases, the number of participants to sort the challenges and strategies to improve
the responsiveness of the health system was 20 people.


**The third step: screening and selecting phrases (Q-sample)**
In this study, we used the semi-structured interview. The
guide to the topics of the interviews were:



1. Can you describe your experience with



implementing health programs based on community
participation?
2. What do you think are the main barriers to



The general goal of the semi-structured interview is
to gather systematic information about a set of central
topics, while also allowing some exploration when new
issues or topics emerge [26]. During semi-structured
interviews with 20 experts in the health department, 67
statements regarding the challenges and strategies to
improve the responsiveness of the health system were
extracted. For choosing statements, we considered the
following: Relevance: The statements should be relevant
to the topic being studied and reflect the range of opinions and perspectives on the topic. Diversity: The statements should cover a range of viewpoints and opinions,
including those that may be less commonly expressed
or controversial. Clarity: The statements should be clear
and concise, avoiding jargon or technical language that
may be difficult for participants to understand. Balance:
The statements should be balanced in terms of positive
and negative views, and avoid bias towards any particular viewpoint. Pilot testing: It is important to pilot test
the statements with a small group of participants before
using them in a larger study, to ensure that they are
understood and interpreted as intended [22, 27]. According to the steps mentioned, 47 phrases were selected.


**The fourth step: Q-sort**
At this stage, the normal distribution table was designed
offline in the form of Likert scale + 4 to -4. The software
was provided to experts. Guidance on how to distribute
expressions on the normal distribution table was provided. So that in the first stage, the purpose of the study
is the number of statements selected through interviews,
in the second stage, placing the phrases in three columns:
I agree, I have no opinion and I disagree, in the third
stage, the distribution of the statements (compulsory) in
the normal distribution diagram of the Likert spectrum
(+ 4 to -4), to explain the reason for choosing the phrases
at both ends of the Likert spectrum from their point of
view, and in the last step, to enter demographic information. Therefore, in Q, the sorting process is subjective

[23], in other words, the operation of sorting items in the
normal distribution network allows each participant to
present his or her internal perspective through his or her
sorting.


**Step five and six: analysis and interpretation of factors**
The data obtained from sorting Q by the students were
entered into the PQ-Method software version 2.35. The
process of analysis and interpretation was done in three
stages: (a) identification of factors (b) conversion of factors into factor arrays (c) interpretation of factors using
factor arrays.



implementing such programs?
3. How do you address or overcome these barriers?
4. Can you provide examples of successful community


based health programs that you have implemented?
5. How do you involve community members in the

planning and implementation of health programs?
6. How do you ensure that the health programs meet



the needs and preferences of the community?
7. How do you measure the effectiveness of



community-based health programs?
8. Have you encountered any challenges or resistance

from community members in implementing health
programs? How did you address them?
9. How do you sustain community-based health



programs over time?
10. What advice would you give to others who are



interested in implementing health programs based
on community participation?



A) Factor Identification: Extraction of factors in



PQ-Method software was done through the
following sequential steps: (a) principal component


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 4 of 9



analysis, (b) identification of hidden factors, (c)
varimax rotation and assessment of factor loadings
for eigenvalues. Above 1.00, d) estimation of the
percentage of variance explained by the identified
factors and (e) differentiation of interpretable factors
with at least two types of correlated Q [27].
B) Converting factors into a factorial array.
The observed correlation between each of the Q rankings
and an identified factor indicates the degree of opposition between the Q rankings and the identified factors

[23, 28]. The manual marking mechanism in the PQMethod software was applied for this study and correlation coefficients of at least 0.297 were considered as the
cut-off point (the absolute value of the factor loading is
greater than (1/96)/(√n), then the factor loading respectively, was significant with 95% confidence, that is, the
value of n was equal to the number of phrases in the Q
study (n = 47). were ordered for the identified factors [29].
The orders specified on a factor are used to create the
factor array for that factor. The factor array represents
the order of that factor (point of view) and using z-scores
is determined. In fact, the array of factors determined for
each factor at what level of the spectrum each expression
is; therefore, according to the position of each expression,
a more accurate interpretation of each factor (mentality)
was achieved. P values (less than 0.05 in vs. 0.01) to distinguish expressions is also determined from the z-score

[30].

C) Factorial interpretation using factorial arrays.
Distinct expressions of Q were identified and factors were
interpreted contextually. The defining phrases for a factor
were those with rank values of “+4”, “+3”, “-4”, “-3” in factor arrays with different scores (P < 0.05) in a given factor.


**Table 1** Participant characteristics
**Variables** **Frequency (%)**
**Gender**
Men 8 (40)
Women 12 (60)
**Study field**
Environment health 2 (10)
Occupational health 2 (10)
General practitioner 1 (5)
Family health 4 (20)
Public health 9 (45)
Health education 2 (10)
**Education level**
Bachelor’s 11(55)
Master’s 8 (40)
Doctoral 1 (5)
**Duration of employment**
Less than 10 years 3(15)
10 to 20 years 9(45)
Up to 20 years 8(40)



Compared to their scores in other factors, the post-P-set
interview was also conducted at the end of the Q-sort to
confirm the recognition and interpretation of the factors
of the subgroups of items among the identified factors.


**Results**
The mean (standard deviation) of the age of the participants in this study was 44.90 (4.81). 60% of the participants in the study were women. 45% of the participant
had public health degree. (Table 1). The average duration of the participants in the distribution of items in Q
sorting was equal to 50 min. Five factors: the first factor
(28%), the second factor (8%), the third factor (8%), the
fourth factor (7%) and the fifth factor (6%) were identified from the point of view of health professionals, which
accounted for 57% of the variance explained.

The rotated matrix of the factors showed that 18 participants were significantly loaded on the first factor and 5
on the second factor, 7 on the third factor, 5 on the fourth
factor and 5 on the fifth factor.

After determining the scores of the factors in the
rotated matrix, to form a Q table for each factor and
give a score to each of the Q options, based on the calculated scores, the factor arrays were calculated and the
Q options were ranked in order of importance was determined for each factor (Table 2).


**Factor 1: barriers related to government systems**
In total 18 participants were significantly loaded on
the first factor and explained a total of 28% of the variance. These participants believed that the lack of public’s
trust in the government and the governmental system in
cooperative works (4+), the existence of social and economic problems in society (4**), the lack of policies to
support cooperative works (3**), and the lack of funds
and resources and the unsustainability of participatory
programs (3**) are among the main factors that hinder
people’s participation in the implementation of health
programs based on community participation.


**Factor 2: barriers related to health programs**
Five participants were significantly loaded on the second
factor and explained a total of 8% of the variance. In this
factor, the participants believed that the lack of attractiveness of health programs (4+**), the lack of incentive
levers in the implementation of health programs (3+*),
the existence of psychological problems in society (3+**),
the lack of public’s trust in the government and government systems (4+), and the existence of economic and
social problems in society are the main barrierss to the
community’s difficulties in implementing health programs based on community participation.


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 5 of 9


**Table 2** The Q-set statements and factor arrays in the study of barriers implement to health education programs
**Items** **Statements** **Factors**
**1** **2** **3** **4** **5**
1 Lack of community understanding toward the goals and benefits of collaborative work 1- 4-* 2- 1** 4**
2 Lack of transparency of roles and responsibilities in the planning, implementation and evalu- 0 3-** 0 2** 4**
ation of the health care system



3 Lack of commitment to community participation, including unwillingness to share power in
health-related decisions



0 1- 0 1 1



4 Reduction of social capital 2** 1- 1- 2- 25 Lack of time for community members 3- 3- 3- 1** 1-**
6 Lack of skills and knowledge of community members 2-* 1- 0 0 1
7 Top-down planning 2 1* 0 1- 3
8 Lack of funds and resources and sustainability of cooperative programs 3** 1* 3* 1- 19 Failure to support the presence of community members in health-based collaborative work 1 2 0 0 1
10 Lack of suitable places for community members to participate in collaborative programs 2- 0 1- 0 0
11 Implementation delay of health programs for participating volunteers 1-** 3-** 0 2 2
12 Lack of proper training for health professionals about working with the community 0 1 4** 1- 0
13 Lack of proper training for communities members to participate in collaborative work 0 1 2 2 0
14 Lack of clarity, transparency and misplaced expectations of society from cooperative works 0 0 1 1- 2
15 Limited timeline for building trust and achieving the breadth and depth of collaborative 3- 2- 2- 1** 2programs

16 Lack of organizational commitment to collaborative work 1 1- 1 2- 217 A history of poor community relations in collaborative health programs 1- 1- 4-** 1- 3**
18 Lack of comprehensive infrastructure to implement the community-based participatory 3 2 1- 1 1program



19 Lack of flexibility to respond to the needs and demands of society in collaborative health
work



1- 2- 3- 0 2


20 Lack of management skills and knowledge of employees in community participation 2- 1 2 2 121 Lack of community representatives in the service management committee and boards of 0 0 1- 3** 1**
directors of cooperative programs



22 Lack of support policies for participatory programs in society 3** 2- 1 3- 0
23 Poor cooperation of community organizations 2 2-** 3 3-** 2
24 Lack of trust, respect and self-confidence in collaborative work 1- 1- 3** 3-** 0
25 Lack of interest in health programs 4-** 2 2 2-** 1
26 Lack of benefit for people participating in health programs 1- 0 4-** 4* 0
27 A history of failure of previous programs based on community participation 2- 2- 0 0 3-**
28 Failure to complete executive projects 1 1 1- 3-* 1
29 Lack of attractiveness of health programs 4-** 4** 0 0 2**
30 Lack of consider the needs of different groups in health programs 1 3- 1 0* 331 Failure to meet expectations and keep people in health programs over time 1 2 0 3 3
32 Lack of understand the information provided 3-** 0 2 0 2
33 Dissatisfaction with the terms of participation 2- 1 2- 2- 0
34 Lack of participation of youth, elderly and minorities 0** 2 2-** 1 3-**
35 The information gap of community members about collaborative work 2- 0 2- 1- 0
36 The low level of people literacy in the community to participate in collaborative work 3-** 2* 1 4-** 0
37 Active community resistance around participating in collaborative programs 1- 0* 2- 3 3
38 People’s lack of trust in the government and the government system in collaborative work 4 4 2 3 1*
39 Lack of proper culturalization and preparing the necessary cultural platform for the imple- 0 0 2** 4** 3-**
mentation of collaborative works

40 Improper planning for the implementation of community cooperative works 1 2- 1 2- 141 load of programs and work parallel in collaborative programs 0 1- 1 4 2
42 Existence of social and economic problems in the community 4** 3** 3- 2-* 443 Existence of psychological problems in society 2** 3** 3-* 4- 444 Lack of sense of duty towards solving problems in society 2 4-* 3 2 2-*
45 Lack of teamwork spirit in society 1 0 1- 0 146 Poor interdepartmental coordination 2 3 4** 1- 147 Lack of incentive levers to sustain and long-term public participation 3* 3* 1- 1** 2
Asterisk (*) Indicates Significance at P < 0.05; Asterisk (**) Indicates Significance at P < 0.01)


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 6 of 9



**Factor 3: barriers related to skills of health professionals**
**and weak coordination between departments**
Seven participants were significantly loaded on this factor and explained a total of 8% of the variance. These
people have issues such as: lack of proper training for
health professionals about working with the community
(4+**), poor inter-departmental coordination (4++), lack
of trust, respect and self-confidence in collaborative work
(3+** ), the lack of sense of duty towards solving the problems in society (3+), and the lack of funds and resources
and the unsustainability of participatory programs (3+*)
were among the main barriers to the implementation of
health programs based on community participation.


**Factor 4: barriers related to the community**
Seven present of the variance of this factor was explained
by 5 participants. These experts believed that the large
amount of programs and parallel work in collaborative
programs (4+), the lack of proper culture and preparing
the necessary cultural platform for the implementation
of collaborative work (4+**), the absence of community
representatives in the management committee services
and board of directors of collaborative programs (3+**),
failure to meet expectations and keeping people in health
programs over time (3+), and active community resistance around participating in collaborative programs (3+)
They knew the main barriers to the implementation of
the health program based on community participation.


**Factor 5: barriers related to understanding of goals,**
**benefits and transparency of roles and responsibilities in**
**health programs**
Five health professionals were significantly loaded on this
factor and explained 6% of the variance. These experts
believed that the lack of a clear and common understanding of the community’s goals and benefits of collaborative
work (4+**), the lack of transparency of roles and responsibilities in the planning, implementation and evaluation
of the health care system (4+**), the history of weak community relations in collaborative health programs (3+**),
top-down planning (3+), active community resistance
around participation in collaborative programs (3+) and
failure to meet expectations and keep people in They
considered the length of time in health programs (3+) as
one of the main barriers to implementing a health program based on community participation.


**Discussion**
Community participation is critical for ensuring that
health programs are effective, equitable, and responsive
to the needs of the community. By involving community
members in the planning and implementation of these
programs, we can build stronger, healthier communities
that are better equipped to address health challenges.



The purpose of this study was to identify the challenges
and strategies to improve the level of responsiveness of
the health system in Iran from the perspective of health
professionals using Q methodology. In this study, 5 factors including the problems of government systems in the
implementation of health programs, problems related to
health programs based on community participation, lack
of necessary skills of health professionals and weak coordination between departments in the implementation of
health programs, problems related to the community in
the implementation of health program and lack of understanding of goals and benefits and transparency of roles
and responsibilities in health programs based on community participation were identified and explained 57%
of the variance. Studies shown that effective community
participation is a key factor for Health Impact Assessment (HIA) to be successful in integrating health considerations non-health policies [31]. So that, community
participation is generally considered a core element in
HIA [32].

The findings of our study showed that the main factor
for the implementation of the health program based on
community participation is the problems related to government systems in the implementation of health programs, such as lack of public’s trust in the government
and the government system in collaborative work, the
existence of social and economic problems of the people.
The lack of support policies for cooperative works, the
lack of funds and resources, and the lack of sustainability
of cooperative programs. In line with these results, studies have shown that trust is a prerequisite for community
participation [33] and building trust or opportunities to
participate at the decision making stage when planning,
implementing, maintaining and utilising results especially for vulnerable groups is one of the key components
for effective community participation [11, 34]. To cultivate strong relationships that build trust, public health
must work through connections made with individuals
and organizations, knowledge of existing relationships
and networks in the community, and face-to-face meetings with communities that do not trust authorities.
Building relationships requires sustained communication
and long-term effort. Providing members with strategies
for self-care and access to support if the work becomes
overwhelming shows that their emotional labor is valued
and helps build trust [35, 36]. On the other hand, building relationships and trust can be established through
investing time, effort and resources to implement programs based on community participation [11]. Previous studies show that community behavior factors such
as trust or opportunity to participate; Ability to participate, and willingness to participate in each activity can be
driven community participation in programs [34]. When
community members trust each other and institutions,


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 7 of 9



they are more likely to share their ideas, concerns, and
feedback. This feedback can be used to inform decisionmaking processes, identify solutions, and improve outcomes. Trust also facilitates the development of strong
relationships between community members and institutions, which can lead to more effective partnerships and
collaborations. Therefore, creation trust on the organizational level such as health system acts as the “social glue”
that can hold different organizational structures together

[37]. In this regard, one of the participants in this study
believes that “people consider the government responsible for the implementation of programs and do not trust
the government system due to the lack of transparency of
programs and the honesty of the government in providing statistics.” Also, another participants said “due to the
discrimination, one-sidedness and bad faith that the society has seen from government organizations and bodies
in recent years, the expected non-participation is completely normal.”

Also, in line with the findings obtained in this study,
other studies have shown that the lack of budget for staff
and other resources (for example, running costs for volunteers) or limited time, is related to the sustainability
problems of social participation projects [11].

The findings of our study showed that one of the
main barriers to participation in the implementation
of health programs based on community participation
is the problems related to health programs, such as the
lack of attractiveness of health programs and the lack
of incentive levers in the implementation of health programs based on community participation. In line with
these results, the study conducted by Nekoi Moghadam
et al. (2017) has shown that the content of educational
programs for health liaisons in Iran lacks attractiveness
and application, and considering financial incentives for
community members, including health volunteers, can
be good incentives for continue their participation in the
health-based program [38].

On the other hand, One potential problem with health
programs that lack community participation is that they
may not effectively address the specific needs of the
community. Without input from community members,
healthcare providers may not fully understand the cultural, social, and economic factors that impact health outcomes in the community. As a result, the program may
not be as effective as it could be in improving health outcomes [39]. Maintaining human resources in the implementation of health programs requires the provision of
welfare services, financial and spiritual supports. Some
studies have shown that financial incentive is one of the
main factors for the continuation of cooperation between
the community and health providers in the implementation of the health program [40, 41]. In this regard, one of
the participations believes that _“unfortunately, both in_



_planning and in implementation, it is necessary to pro-_
_ceed in a directive manner and in line with the upstream_
_documents, and much maneuvering power is not given to_
_the environmental levels, let alone to comment and con-_
_sider reward”._ Also, another person said: _“people’s par-_
_ticipation in health programs needs to continue for a long_
_time to reach the goal, if there is no incentive tool, people_
_will lose interest.”_

According to the findings, other barriers to the implementation of health programs based on community
participation was the lack of essential skills of health
professionals and weak inter-sectoral coordination in the
implementation of the health program. In line with these
results, studies have also shown that the lack of training
of health professionals and the community is one of the
barriers to the implementation of health programs in the
community [16]. Appropriate training in community participation and co-production is needed for health workers involved in the implementation of health programs.
The lack of these general and specific skills is considered
as a barrier to effective community participation. There
is evidence from studies that training and capacity building for all sectors of society is an essential facilitator for
effective community participation. All these studies
emphasize the need for training and/or capacity building of different types, for different areas, and for different
reasons or outcomes [42–44]. On the other hand, studies show that weak inter-departmental communication in
the implementation of the health program and the participation of health volunteers are barriers to the implementation of the health program [38]. In this regard, one
of the participants said: _“coherent and organized planning_
_and activities do not exist in practice for inter-depart-_
_mental participation by superior institutions. Although_
_sometimes in different parts of the government, the issue_
_of inter-departmental participation in the form of the_
_instructions and directives are well seen, but they are not_
_implemented in the executive and operational aspects or_
_are done incompletely.”_

Our study showed that another important barrier to the
implementation of a health program based on community participation is the problems related to the community including the large volume of programs and parallel
work in collaborative programs, the lack of proper culture and preparing the necessary cultural platform for
the implementation of collaborative work. In this regard,
studies have also shown that one of the problems related
to the implementation of the health program is the lack
of awareness of the linguistic and cultural issues of that
community, the lack of awareness of the opportunities,
rights and structures in the community and the absence
of community representatives in the planning of participation in the program is sanitary [16]. It seems that participatory approaches and positive outcomes, including


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 8 of 9



community empowerment and health improvement, do
not occur in a linear progression, but involve complex
processes that are influenced by a set of social and cultural factors. A review study has shown that empowering
the community and their participation in the implementation of the health program can be done at the individual, social and organizational levels [11]. In line with
these contents, one of the participants believes that _“in_
_order to create a sense of duty to solve problems, it is nec-_
_essary to create a proper culture starting from elementary_
_schools and be considered as a value throughout the entire_
_period of education and life.”_

The lack of understanding of the benefits and goals of
the health program in the community is another main
barrier to the implementation of a health program based
on community participation. In this regard, studies have
shown that a collaborative health program can include
short-term and long-term benefits for that community

[45]. On the other hand, familiarizing health professionals with the goals and benefits of health programs based
on community participation can directly facilitate the
target community’s achievement of the goals and benefits of the participation program [46]. Also, specifying
the roles and responsibilities for the community members in the implementation of the health program can
have an effective role in advancing the program, because
the participating people have a sense of ownership in the
implementation of the program. The continuous communication and cooperation of the health system with
the covered community can play an effective role in
building trust between the parties, and in case of lack of
communication, the health system will be in charge of
implementing health programs and the community will
absolve itself of this responsibility.

This current study has a number of limitations. Due to
the time-consuming and the need to focus on the distribution of items on the normal Likert spectrum, the participants may have less noticed the importance of placing
the items. Q-methodology is an exploratory tool, which
helps in providing a useful insight into the existing views
or opinions in society or a group of people. It also helps
in characterizing each viewpoint. Q-methodology studies
are not intended to generalize a finding or determine the
proportion of individuals holding a particular opinion.


**Conclusion**
Health policymakers and managers should consider the
five mentioned identified barriers based on the community when planning and implementing the health program participation and try to empower the community to
implement the programs in Iran.


**Abbreviations**
WHO World Health Organization



**Acknowledgements**
The author would like to appreciate all study participants kind cooperation
without which study would have not been completed.


**Authors’ contributions**
All authors contributed to the study conception and design. Material
preparation, data collection and analysis were performed by [H.M], [A.M.B],

[A.A], [M.Z] and [R.G.G]. The first draft of the manuscript was written by [H.M]
and all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.


**Funding**
No funds, grants, or other support was received.


**Data Availability**
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.


**Declarations**


**Ethical approval and consent to participate**
The study was approved by Institutional Review Board at the Kurdistan
University of Medical Sciences (IR.MUK.REC.1398.164). We confirm that
all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines
and regulations by including a statement in the Declarations section. All
participants provided informed consent.


**Consent for publication**
Not Applicable.


**Conflict of interest**
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.


Received: 12 February 2023 / Accepted: 11 October 2023


**References**
1. World Health Organization. Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion. Geneva:
WHO., 1986. Google Sch. 1986.
2. World Health Organisation. Obesity: preventing and managing the global
epidemic. World Health Organization; 2000.
3. World Health Organization U. Primary health care: report of the International
Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6–12 September 1978.
1978.
4. Declaration J. Jakarta declaration on leading health promotion into the 21st
century. In: Fourth International Conference on Health Promotion, Jakarta.
1997.
5. Olu O, Drameh-Avognon P, Asamoah-Odei E, Kasolo F, Valdez T, Kabaniha G et
al. Community participation and private sector engagement are fundamental
to achieving universal health coverage and health security in Africa: reflections from the second Africa health forum. In: BMC proceedings. BioMed
[Central; 2019. p. 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12919-019-0170-0.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12919-019-0170-0)
6. L. M. Community participation in health: perpetual allure, persistent
[challenge. Health Policy Plan. 2001;16(3):221–30. https://doi.org/10.1093/](https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/16.3.221)
[heapol/16.3.221.](https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/16.3.221)
7. Kahssay H. M OP. Community involvement in health development: a review
of the concept and practice. GenevaWorld Heal Organ. 1999.
8. Sahbaei F, Niksadat N, Keshavarz NTM. Health communicators performance
in Iran. J Med Counc IRI. 2016;34(2):157–62.
9. Damari B, Heidarnia Mohamad ALI, Rahbari Bonab M. Role and performance of Iranian NGOs in Community Health Promotion. Payeash.
2014;13(5):541–50.
10. Babaie J, Jabbari Beirami H. Involvement Areas of Urban and Rural Islamic

councils members in Province Health System: a grounded theory study.
Arumshealth. 2015;1(3):325–36.
11. Haldane V, Koh CG, Chuah H, Srivastava FLH, Singh A. Community participa
tion in health services development, implementation, and evaluation:
a systematic review of empowerment, health, community, and process


Mahmoodi _et al. BMC Public Health_ (2023) 23:2019 Page 9 of 9



[outcomes. PLoS ONE. 2019;14(5):e0216112. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0216112)
[pone.0216112.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0216112)
12. Giné X, Khalid S, Mansuri G. The Impact of Social Mobilization on Health

Service Delivery and Health outcomes. Volume 18. Oxford University Press;
[2018. pp. 237–52. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198829591.003.0011.](https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198829591.003.0011)
13. Moitra A, Kumar A, Seth A. An analysis of community mobilization strategies

of a voice-based community media platform in rural India. Inf Technol Int
[Dev. 2018;14:18. https://doi.org/10.1145/2909609.2909670.](https://doi.org/10.1145/2909609.2909670)
14. Twombly EC, Holtz KD, Stringer K. Using Promotores programs to improve

latino health outcomes: implementation challenges for community-based
[nonprofit organizations. J Soc Serv Res. 2012;38(3):305–12. https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1080/01488376.2011.633804)
[1080/01488376.2011.633804.](https://doi.org/10.1080/01488376.2011.633804)
15. Yamanoi R, Ishida K, Asai M, Senoo K. Strengths and obstacles related to

Mobilizing Community businesses: qualitative analysis of interviews with
employees of Comprehensive Community Support centers. Japanese J Soc
[Welf. 2014;54(5):41–53. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203075968-17.](https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203075968-17)
16. Harden A, Sheridan K, McKeown A, Dan-Ogosi I, Bagnall A-M. Review 5:

evidence review of barriers to, and facilitators of, Community Engagement
approaches and practices in the UK. 2016.
17. Mahmoodi H, Sarbakhsh P, Shaghaghi A. Barriers to adopt the Health

promoting hospitals (HPH) initiative in Iran: the Q method derived perspec[tives of front line practitioners. Patient Educ Couns. 2019;102(4). https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2018.10.030)
[org/10.1016/j.pec.2018.10.030.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2018.10.030)
18. Ramlo SE, Newman I. Q methodology and its position in the mixed methods

[continuum. Operant Subj. 2011;34(3):172–91. https://doi.org/10.22488/](https://doi.org/10.22488/okstate.11.100594)
[okstate.11.100594.](https://doi.org/10.22488/okstate.11.100594)
19. Watts S, Stenner P. Doing Q methodological research: theory, method &

[interpretation. Sage; 2012. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446251911.](https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446251911)
20. Brown SR. Q methodology and qualitative research. Qual Health Res.

[1996;6(4):561–7. https://doi.org/10.1177/104973239600600408.](https://doi.org/10.1177/104973239600600408)
21. Churruca K, Ludlow K, Wu W, Gibbons K, Nguyen HM, Ellis LA, et al. A scoping

review of Q-methodology in healthcare research. BMC Med Res Methodol.
[2021;21(1):125. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-021-01309-7.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-021-01309-7)
22. Dieteren CM, Patty NJS, Reckers-Droog VT, van Exel J. Methodological

choices in applications of Q methodology: a systematic literature review.
[Soc Sci Humanit Open. 2023;7(1):100404. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssaho.2023.100404)
[ssaho.2023.100404.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssaho.2023.100404)
23. Barry J, Proops J. Seeking sustainability discourses with Q methodology. Ecol

[Econ. 1999;28(3):337–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0921-8009(98)00053-6.](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0921-8009(98)00053-6)
24. Watts SSP, Doing. Q methodology: theory, method and interpretation. Qual

[Res Psychol. 2005;2(1):67–91. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088705qp022oa.](https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088705qp022oa)
25. Danielson S, Webler T, Tuler SP. Using Q method for the formative evaluation

[of public participation processes. Soc Nat Resour. 2009;23(1):92–6. https://](https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920802438626)
[doi.org/10.1080/08941920802438626.](https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920802438626)
26. Wilson C. Chapter 2 - semi-structured interviews. Wilson CBT-IT for UXP,

[editor. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann; 2014;23–41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/](https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-410393-1.00002-8)
[b978-0-12-410393-1.00002-8.](https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-410393-1.00002-8)
27. Watts S, Stenner P. Doing the fieldwork: participants, materials and procedure.

Doing Q methodol res theory, method interpret London. UK SAGE Publ.
[2012;69–90. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446251911.n4.](https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446251911.n4)
28. Bartlett JE, DeWeese B. Using the Q Methodology Approach in Human

Resource Development Research. Adv Dev Hum Resour. 2014;8(1):72–87.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1523422314559811.](https://doi.org/10.1177/1523422314559811)
29. O’Leary K, Wobbrock JO, Riskin EA. Q-Methodology as a Research and

Design Tool for HCI. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
[Factors in Computing Systems. ACM; 2013. p. 1941–50. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466256)
[org/10.1145/2470654.2466256.](https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466256)
30. Newman I, Ramlo S. Using Q methodology and Q factor analysis in mixed

methods research. Sage Handb Mix Methods Soc Behav Res. 2010;505–30.
[https://doi.org/10.4135/9781506335193.n20.](https://doi.org/10.4135/9781506335193.n20)



31. Bourcier E, Charbonneau D, Cahill C, Dannenberg AL. Peer reviewed: an

evaluation of health impact assessments in the United States, 2011–2014.
[Prev Chronic Dis. 2015;12. https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd12.140376.](https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd12.140376)
32. Den Broeder L, Uiters E, Ten Have W, Wagemakers A, Schuit AJ. Community

participation in Health Impact Assessment. A scoping review of the litera[ture. Environ Impact Assess Rev. 2017;66:33–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2017.06.004)
[eiar.2017.06.004.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2017.06.004)
33. Ramsbottom A, O’Brien E, Ciotti L, Takacs J. Enablers and barriers to Com
munity Engagement in public health emergency preparedness: a literature
[review. J Community Health. 2018;43(2):412–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10900-017-0415-7)
[s10900-017-0415-7.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10900-017-0415-7)
34. Hermawan D, Hutagalung SS. Development of community participa
tion based on behaviour in managing participative programs. Masyara[kat, Kebud dan Polit. 2019;32(3):311–22. https://doi.org/10.20473/mkp.](https://doi.org/10.20473/mkp.v32i32019.312-322)
[v32i32019.312-322.](https://doi.org/10.20473/mkp.v32i32019.312-322)
35. Schoch-Spana M, Sell TK, Morhard R. Local health department capacity

for Community Engagement and its implications for Disaster resilience.
[Biosecur Bioterror Biodefense Strateg Pract Sci. 2013;11(2):118–29. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1089/bsp.2013.0027)
[org/10.1089/bsp.2013.0027.](https://doi.org/10.1089/bsp.2013.0027)
36. Reyes D, Meyer K. Identifying community priorities for neighborhood livabil
ity: engaging neighborhood residents to facilitate community assessment.
[Public Health Nurs. 2020;37(1):87–95. https://doi.org/10.1111/phn.12674.](https://doi.org/10.1111/phn.12674)
37. Puusa A, Tolvanen U. Organizational identity and trust. EJBO-Electronic J Bus

Ethics Organ Stud. 2006.
38. Nekoui Moghadam M, Khanjani N, Sepehrian R, Sharifi T. Recruitment and

retention of health volunteers in health care centers in Kerman City in 2013: a
qualitative study. J Payavard Salamat. 2017;10(5):379–92.
39. Şandru C. Participatory needs assessment in local communities. Method
ological aspects. Bull Transilv Univ Braşov Ser VII Soc Sci Law. 2014;(2):97–104.
40. Alam K, Oliveras E. Retention of female volunteer community health workers

in Dhaka urban slums: a prospective cohort study. Hum Resour Health.
[2014;12(1):1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-12-29.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-12-29)
41. Rahman SM, Ali NA, Jennings L, Seraji MHR, Mannan I, Shah R, et al. Factors

affecting recruitment and retention of community health workers in a newborn care intervention in Bangladesh. Hum Resour Health. 2010;8(1):1–14.
[https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-8-12.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-8-12)
42. Lawson L, Kearns A. Community Engagement in regeneration: are we getting

[the point? J Hous Built Environ. 2010;25(1):19–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10901-009-9168-7)
[s10901-009-9168-7.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10901-009-9168-7)
43. Hatamian A, Pearmain D, Golden S. Outcomes of the active at 60 community

agent programme. Department for Work and Pensions Sheffield, UK; 2012.
44. Cinderby S, Haq G, Cambridge H, Lock K. Practical action to build community

resilience: The Good Life initiative in New Earswick. 2014.
45. Diab P, Flack P. Benefits of community-based education to the community

in South African health science facilities. Vol. 5, African Journal of Primary
[Health Care & Family Medicine. 2013. 23;5(1): https://doi.org/10.4102/phcfm.](https://doi.org/10.4102/phcfm.v5i1.474)
[v5i1.474.](https://doi.org/10.4102/phcfm.v5i1.474)
46. Kiran T, Rodrigues JJ, Aratangy T, Devotta K, Sava N, O’Campo P. Awareness

and use of Community Services among Primary Care Physicians. Healthc
[Policy. 2020;16(1):58–77. https://doi.org/10.12927/hcpol.2020.26290.](https://doi.org/10.12927/hcpol.2020.26290)


**Publisher’s Note**
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.


