**African Journal of Primary Health Care & Family Medicine**
ISSN: (Online) 2071-2936, (Print) 2071-2928


~~Page 1 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


t


# **Community members’ perceptions of**

t


# **community health workers in Melusi,**

t


# **Tshwane, South Africa**

t



t



t



t



t



**Background:** Community health workers (CHWs) play an important role in health promotion
through health campaigns and home visits, and provide linkage to care and support patient
management. In the informal settlements, CHWs identify health challenges and help residents
to access healthcare facilities.


**Aim:** This study aimed to explore the perception held by the community members regarding
CHWs’ contribution to health promotion in Melusi informal settlements within the Tshwane
district.


**Setting:** The study was conducted in Melusi informal settlement situated in Pretoria west in
South Africa.


**Methods:** Descriptive exploratory qualitative research methods were used, with open and
closed-ended questions during individual interview sessions. Participants were purposefully
selected in collaborating with the community leaders and using CHWs’ data to identify
individuals with direct interaction with CHWs.


**Results:** Participants praised CHWs’ communication skills, engagement strategies, and ability
to provide valuable health services. Community members expected CHWs to provide
healthcare services, educational support, advocacy for health issues and guidance on wellbeing. Barriers such as community resistance, a lack of privacy and difficulties in reaching
households were noticed. However, CHWs were commended for their impact on well-being,
offering health services, emergency support, food assistance and improved healthcare
accessibility.


**Conclusion:** The study indicates that community members have positive perceptions of
CHWs. This highlights the significant role of CHWs in promoting health and well-being within
the community.


**Contribution:** This study provides insights into community perceptions of CHWs in informal
settlements, emphasising their impact on community well-being. It provides a basis for their
effectiveness and support in delivering health services in the informal settlement.


**Keywords:** community health workers; health promotion; informal settlement; community
perception; barriers; healthcare accessibility.


t


## Attribution License. Introduction

t



t



t



The City of Tshwane has a number of informal settlements where communities are faced with
healthcare challenges. In these settlements, residents usually experience health-related issues,
limited access to formal healthcare and a lack of service delivery. The role of community
health workers (CHWs) is vital in health promotion given the need for community-driven
healthcare solutions. The CHWs are an integral part of the Community Orientated Primary
Care (COPC) approach. [1] They must establish relationships with both household members
and community leaders to build the link between community health and community
members. [1]


The CHWs are trained and equipped with various skills and taught how to implement the training
practically. [2] They are instrumental in ensuring the healthcare of individuals in the community. [2]


They employ various methods, such as health promotion, counselling and education to individuals
and households within the community. [2]


~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 2 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


t



Low- and middle-income countries face several challenges in
providing basic healthcare to their populations, primarily
because of financial, infrastructural and human resource
constraints. [3] The CHWs usually provide affordable basic
healthcare to the people in their communities. [3] They are in a
good position to connect the community with the healthcare
system and make sure people get the care they need
consistently. [3] The CHW programmes vary in design, ranging
from large government initiatives to smaller community-led
programmes. [3] These programmes have made it easier for
people in remote areas to access healthcare services. [3]


Community perceptions play an important role in
understanding the effectiveness and acceptance of CHWs
and their role in health promotion within the community. [3]
Community perceptions of CHWs, whether positive or
negative, can provide valuable feedback for decision-making
in healthcare policies and resource allocation. [3]


This study explored the perceptions held by the community
members residing in the Melusi informal settlement in the
City of Tshwane district.
## **Research methods and design**

**Study design**

A descriptive exploratory qualitative study design was used
to uncover the deeper meanings and essence of residents’
perceptions regarding CHW’s roles in health promotion
within informal settlements, providing valuable insights for
improving community-oriented healthcare interventions.
The study used both open and closed-ended questions when
conducting in-depth interviews. This study examined the
lived experiences and perceptions of residents residing in
Melusi informal settlements regarding the role of CHWs in
health promotion.


**Setting**

The study took place in Melusi informal settlement in Pretoria
West within the City of Tshwane District, South Africa. Melusi
is a growing informal settlement located within Greater
Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality in the Gauteng province. [4]
The area is divided into three sections, namely Melusi 1, 2,
and 3, commonly known as Gomora, Malaribeng and
Maluleka, respectively, with approximately 8000 households.


The primary healthcare services for this community are
rendered at Daspoort Poli-Clinic and Hercules Clinic while
Pretoria West Hospital and Kalafong provides the secondary
healthcare services.


The Melusi community is served by 22 CHWs who conduct
household visits and provide assistance at the local clinic.
Each CHW is assigned to approximately 250 households,
where they engage in a wide range of health promotion
activities and preventive measures. Their responsibilities
include identifying individuals with poor treatment
compliance and providing education to enhance adherence


t



to medical regimens. Beyond this, CHWs play a crucial role
in offering basic health education, promoting healthy
lifestyles and advocating for public health initiatives within
the community. They assist in the management of chronic
diseases by monitoring patients’ health status and ensuring
continuity of care. The CHWs also provide psychosocial
support to patients and their families, helping them navigate
the healthcare system and access necessary services. They are
instrumental in mobilising community resources and
fostering community participation in health-related activities.
Their efforts include organising health campaigns, conducting
workshops and disseminating information on disease
prevention and health maintenance.


The community operates a satellite clinic led by a clinical
associate and a nurse, offering acute management and
screening for both non-communicable and communicable
diseases. This clinic functions twice a week, with two CHWs
rotating to assist in various tasks, such as taking vital signs,
weighing infants, conducting human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) tests and linking patients to the nearest primary
healthcare facility for chronic disease services.


**Study population and sampling strategy**

The study participants were residents of the Melusi informal
settlement. These individuals represented the target group
whose perceptions regarding the role of CHWs in health
promotion were investigated. The recruitment process for
this study followed a carefully planned approach to identify
and select participants who align with the inclusion criteria.
The criteria for inclusion encompassed individuals aged 18
years and above residing in Melusi, who had direct exposure
to CHWs and health promotion activities. Candidates were
excluded if they lacked direct interaction with CHWs or if
they were visiting but not residing within the Melusi area.


The sample size for this study was determined through a
process guided by the study’s qualitative design, specifically
aiming to achieve data saturation where no new information
or themes emerge from additional data collection. Following
guidelines in the qualitative research literature by Guest et al.
and Saunders et al., which suggest that a minimum of 12 to
20 participants is often sufficient to achieve data saturation,
we focussed on including a diverse group of participants
from the Melusi informal settlement. [5,6] Throughout the study,
we closely monitored data saturation and data collection
continued until no new insights emerged from the interviews.


Potential participants were identified through purposeful
sampling, involving collaborating with community leaders,
local organisations and data collected by CHWs using the
COPC approach. Households listed on the CHWs’ records as
receiving care were visited. During these visits, the head of
each household was informed about the study and invited to
nominate an adult participant who had experience with
CHWs. This approach ensured that participants selected for
the study were knowledgeable about the role of CHWs and
had relevant experiences to contribute.


t



~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 3 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


t



After recruitment, the researcher initiated contact with the
participants and then clarified the study’s objectives. A clear
overview of the research aims and the importance of their
perspectives was provided during the initial communication.
Individuals expressing interest in participating were
provided with a detailed informed consent form. Participants
had the opportunity to ask questions and only proceed if
they voluntarily provided written consent.


**Data collection**

A semi-structured interview was used for data collection,
aiming to get detailed information on the community’s
perception of CHWs’ role in health promotion. The interview
guide was developed by the researcher aligning with the
study’s aim and focussing on how community members
perceive CHWs’ impact on the health outcome in the
informal settlements in the Tshwane district (Supplementary
File 1). The researcher used the interview guide during the
data collection to ensure consistency throughout the data
collection process. Interviews were conducted either at the
participant’s household or at the Melusi Clinic for those
unable to host at home. The interviews took place in person
and were conducted in the participants’ home language to
facilitate open and meaningful communication. Participants
were encouraged to freely express their views and opinions
in their preferred language. The process began with
providing participants comprehensive information about
the study, allowing them to ask questions to ensure clarity.
Once participants fully understood the study, they were
presented with a consent form to sign if they chose to
participate. The primary question posed to participants was,
‘Do you believe that CHWs play a significant role in
addressing these health challenges? Why or why not?’
Probing questions were used to delve deeper into responses
(Supplementary File 1).


Participants were asked a combination of open-ended
and close-ended questions to explore their experiences
thoroughly. All information collected during the interviews
was recorded and field notes were documented both during
and after each interview to ensure the accuracy and integrity
of the data.


**Data analysis**

The transcription process followed guidelines for qualitative
research methodologies by Guest et al., ensuring accuracy,
context preservation and consistency throughout. [7] Bilingual
transcribers, a research assistant at the School of Public Health
with experience in transcribing, proficient in both the
participants’ home languages and the study language, initially
transcribed audio recordings in the participants’ native
languages to capture their exact expressions and wording.
These transcripts were then translated into the study language
to maintain context, preserve meaning, support analysis and
ensure a comprehensive understanding of participants’ views
and opinions. The researcher meticulously reviewed transcripts
and repeatedly listened to recordings to verify their accuracy
throughout the transcription and translation process.


t



To analyse the data, the first author, RKM, used ATLAS.ti
Scientific Software Development GmbH, Berlin, Germany
(ATLAS.ti 24) for coding to identify recurring phrases and
ideas. Direct quotes were incorporated to accurately reflect the
participants’ statements. The process began with data
familiarisation, followed by defining the unit of analysis and
identifying relevant segments. [8] Inductive coding was used to
generate initial themes, which were then organised into
categories. Themes were subsequently validated against the
data, ensuring rigour through transparency, reflexivity and
triangulation. This method allowed for the discovery of
meaningful patterns and insights aligned with the research
question. [8]


To ensure the quality and trustworthiness of our study, we
adhered to established qualitative research criteria, including
credibility, transferability, dependability, confirmability and
authenticity. [9] Credibility was maintained through meticulous
recording of participants’ perceptions during interviews and
the integration of researcher observations to identify
influencing factors. Triangulation of information through
repetitive questioning further ensured comprehensive data
collection. Participants were selected based on their direct
experience with CHWs, allowing for a diverse representation
of perspectives on CHWs’ roles in health promotion. All data
collection instruments, such as field notes and audio
recordings, were rigorously documented and reviewed by a
supervisor to ensure dependability. We focussed on
confirmability by systematically analysing data to faithfully
represent participants’ voices. Direct quotes were used to
authentically convey participants’ statements, preserving the
integrity and transparency of their contributions to the study.


**Ethical considerations**

Ethical clearance to conduct this study was obtained from
the University of Pretoria, Faculty of Health Sciences
Research Ethics Committee (No. 664/2023). The COPC
Research Unit and the Melusi community leaders granted
permission for the study to be conducted in Melusi
community. Individuals who agreed to participate in the
study were required to sign an informed consent form.
## **Results**

The study comprised of 20 participants, with 3 males and 17
females as detailed in Table 1. The ages of the participants,
which varied from 28 to 67 years, showed a diversified
demographic. Additionally, their duration of residency in
Melusi varied from 3 to 22 years, providing a broad spectrum
of perspectives within the community.


Numerous themes emerged concerning the community’s
perception of CHWs and their role in health promotion
within Melusi’s informal settlement. These themes
include community’s expectations from CHWs, the role of
CHWs in addressing health challenges and barriers and
recommendations for improvement (Table 2). Each theme
offers valuable insights into the dynamics between


t



~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 4 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


i i


i i


t



CHWs and Melusi’s residents, fostering a comprehensive
understanding of the community’s viewpoint (Table 2).


**Community’s interaction and perception about**
**community health workers**

Participants commended CHWs for their effective
communication skills and capacity to deliver invaluable
health services:


**TABLE 1:** Characteristics of study participants.

**Participant** **Age** **Sex** **Number of years and months**
**residing in Melusi**


P20 31 Female 5 years


i i


t



‘They know how to speak to people and they know how to
explain themselves. They are good when it comes to come to
getting attention from a person. They service is just good.’
(P20_F_31)


‘The care workers once visited me, they spoke to me in a nice
manner and with smiles.’ (P10_F_29)


‘Yes, the interaction was amazing and they were all so
informative about the questions I had for them.’ (P12_F_29)


One participant remarked on the CHWs’ courteous demeanour

i i and thoroughness during household visits, while another

acknowledged the timely and helpful support provided
during a challenging situation involving a sick family member:


‘They are good people, they spoke nicely with us and they
counted us to know how many we are in the house.’
(P17_F_33)


‘The visit was right, because I had a sick family member and they
assisted me with her.’ (P4_F_54)


Participants admired CHWs’ determination in their door-todoor efforts:


‘They persevere and reach people with their door-to-door
initiative even when it is difficult.’ (P5_F_39)


**Community expectation from community health**
**worker**

Expectations were voiced regarding CHWs providing access
to health services, which included offering information about
nearby clinics, conducting HIV and pregnancy tests, screening
for TB and diabetes during household visits, and facilitating


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


**TABLE 2:** Community perceptions and recommendations: Themes and sub-themes from a study on community health workers in Melusi.

**Theme** **Sub-theme** **Summary**


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


t



i i


i i


CHWs, Community health workers; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; TB, tuberculosis; STI, sexually transmitted infection.


~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 5 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


t



connections between community members and social
workers. When asked about the health-related services or
support they expect from CHWs, the participants responded:


‘HIV testing and testing for diabetes and also TB (tuberculosis).
Most people around are coughing a lot.’ (P19_F_33)


‘They should help the sick, they should inform us about the
clinics near us. They should also give us information on where
we can get help from social workers.’ (P11_F_29)


Participants expressed expectations for CHWs to advocate for
health issues and provide guidance on maintaining well-being:


‘They must help with sick family members, ensure they eat well,
and adhere to their treatment.’ (P3_F_28)


There was an expectation for CHWs to assist with children
not attending school, providing educational support and
guidance:


‘I expect them to assist with children who are not attending
school. Those children need education.’ (P17_F_33)


One participant anticipates collaboration between CHWs
and nurses, particularly in instances where the clinic is
inaccessible, to provide assistance to the community across
various needs:


‘They should do their community rounds with nurses, due to the
fact that sometimes the clinic isn’t available. They also assist the
community with any other help they might need from them.’
(P14_F_30)


**Role of community health workers in addressing**
**health challenges**

In this theme, participants shared their observations of how
CHWs address health challenges. Perceptions from participants
suggest that CHWs contribute by providing guidance and
referrals for community members to start treatment:


‘They also assisted a lot of people to start treatment.’ (P11_F_29)


‘Okay, my mother was unwell and sometimes was not able to go
to the clinic, so one care worker assisted with referring her to the
clinic, and till today she doesn’t suffer whenever she goes to the
clinic.’ (P12_F_29)


‘They came to me and asked for my information and status, and
I disclosed. They asked me if I am on treatment or not. When I
said I was not on treatment they encouraged me to go to the
clinic a check if I am not yet on a stage where I should be starting
treatment, likely I got there right on time and I was put on
treatment. Ever since I have started everything is going well I am
healthy.’ (P6_F_54)


They support in treatment adherence, ensuring that
household members who are unable to reach health facilities
receive their medication during household visits:


‘They also bring some patients pills when they cannot go collect
for themselves.’ (P14_F_30)


Participants highlighted instances where CHWs played a
role in promoting acceptance of health conditions, especially
in cases related to HIV:


t



‘There was a sick lady who was sick but did not go to the clinic
to seek help and she was not on any treatment. She was coughing,
those people came and talked to her and encouraged her to go to
the clinic. She is now doing very well, you will not even tell it’s
her.’ (P5_F_39)


Participants underscored the comprehensive role of
CHWs, including addressing instances of abuse within the
community:


‘They helped someone to escape abuse, they referred the person
to a social worker so that that person can get the help they
needed.’ (P11_F_29)


Participants also underscored the significance of CHWs in
conducting health assessments directly from homes:


‘[ _W_ ]hen there is a mobile clinic they pass by me and when they
do health checks they also make sure I also get checked.’
(P1_M_32)


‘They help with doing health checks and testing from the homes
since most community members are afraid of going to the clinic.’
(P3_F_28)


The CHWs were commended for their holistic approach to
community well-being. Beyond medical services, they
extend support in obtaining social benefits, such as
providing food parcels:


‘They helped us with getting food parcels and vouchers which
was a very great initiative and we are grateful.’ (P1_M_32)


‘They assist with food parcels and mostly they have and know
relevant solutions and information to any problems we might
have in the community.’ (P13_F_67)


One participant recounted an impactful intervention by
CHWs, where they provided guidance and support to a
vulnerable child in the community:


‘They once helped this other child who did not have a birth
certificate, not in school, and abusing alcohol. This child was so
wrong that she would swear at her parents always at the tavern
drinking and even changing boyfriends. They came and
encouraged her that education is the key and tavern will not
pay her, they also gave her an advice that having different
partners is not good she will end up being sick. They guided
her to go to school so she can succeed in life.’ (P10_F_29)


Another participant highlighted CHWs’ educational outreach
efforts regarding alcohol abuse and school attendance during
household visits:


‘[ _T_ ]hey visit households and educate them on the dangers of
alcohol abuse and the consequences of not staying in school.’
(P10_F_29)


**Barriers and recommendations for improvement**
**Challenges faced by community health workers**

Participants recounted situations where CHWs encountered
resistance, hostility or rudeness from community members,
including instances where some individuals refused to
open their gates or doors, while others even chased them
away:


t



~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 6 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


t



‘Community members do not want them, they are not welcoming
them into their home others even close their gates.’ (P13_F_67)


Participants continued to highlight the difficult circumstances
faced by CHWs, observing instances where they were
subjected to verbal abuse and insults, and encountered
young children in vulnerable situations because of the
absence of parental care:


‘Most households are not welcoming and do not treat them well.
Some chase them away, others shout at them and swear at them.’
(P11_F_29)


‘People swear at them, they insult them and, in some cases, they
find young children with parents who have long passed away,
this comes as a barrier because the children are too young to take
care of themselves.’ (P16_F_42)


Participants expressed concerns about the confidentiality
of their health information when interacting with CHWs,
with one noting uncertainty about specific issues but
highlighting apprehensions regarding the disclosure of
illnesses to others:


‘I do not know what specific problems they are facing. But I think
some people don’t like them because some say they disclose
their illnesses to other people.’ (P4_F_54)


Another participant emphasised the importance of
maintaining confidentiality to enable individuals to fully
disclose their health concerns and receive assistance:


‘People cannot disclose to the community health workers and
this hinders them to do their job in the community.’ (P6_F_54)


‘According to how I know their work and since we have different
sicknesses, I would appreciate it if they can assist those who
cannot help themselves and also what is spoken with every
patient should be kept confidential at all times.’ (P6_F_54)


Participants stressed the challenges faced by CHWs, who
operate within designated working hours, in reaching
households where occupants are employed during those
hours:


‘In cases where there is a severely sick person in the household,
they cannot come and make sure that the patient takes their
medication on time since they have working hours (they do not
work 24/7.’ (P1_M_32)


‘They should work full-time for elderly people and for chronic
especially those living with HIV, people mostly do not accept
their statuses and do not take their treatments well.’ (P7_F_33)


**Health challenges faced by community**

The majority of participants identified communicable
diseases, particularly HIV, TB, and Sexually Transmitted
Infections (STIs), as the most pressing health challenges faced
by residents of the informal settlements in the City of
Tshwane:


‘Mostly its HIV, they are struggling with HIV.’ (P8_F_40)


‘The first and high illness is HIV/AIDS followed by STIs, TB and
flu is also common.’ (P20_F_31)


t



Diabetes and hypertension were the two non-communicable
diseases (NCDs) that participants pointed out among the
most pressing health challenges faced by residents, followed
by depression:


‘High Blood Pressure and sugar diabetes. Is depression a health
problem?’ (P7_F_33)


‘We can include depression, most ladies who are staying with
their boyfriends suffer from depression. It is a big challenge.’
(P7_F_33)


**Recommendations for community awareness**

To enhance the recognition and acceptance of CHWs within
the community, a participant recommended organising
health education workshops and community meetings to
raise awareness about the role of CHWs:


‘If only we can have health education workshops to educate
the community about health workers and their roles in the
community.’ (P3_F_28)


In addition, it was recommended that CHWs should establish
focus groups to educate the community about health-related
issues and life skills:


‘They can also create focus groups where they can educate us
about health-related issues and life.’ (P10_F_29)


Emphasising confidentiality, a participant proposed a
community meeting to reassure residents about the privacy
of discussions with CHWs:


‘I think there should be a meeting with the community, to
reassure them that all things discussed with community health
workers will remain highly confidential.’ (P4_F_54)


One participant recommended the hiring of more CHWs,
accentuating their value and the community’s need for their
assistance:


‘I would recommend that they hire more community health
workers, they are very helpful and we need them.’ (P5_F_39)


Another participant recommended extending clinic hours,
hiring more staff, and expanding facilities:


‘I can recommend that our clinic can improve and work 24hrs,
also that they should hire enough health workers and if we can
have nurses and a doctor and they should extend the clinic.’
(P11_F_2)
## **Discussion**

This study involved 20 participants to explore community
perceptions of CHWs and their role in health promotion. The
participants in this study were mainly female (85%).
Participants praised CHWs for their communication skills,
engagement strategies and ability to provide valuable health
services. Community viewed CHWs not just as sources of
information but also as supportive figures during healthrelated challenges. Community members expressed various
expectations from CHWs, including healthcare services,
educational support, advocacy for health issues and guidance


t



~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 7 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


t



on well-being. Despite these positive perceptions, participants
found barriers such as community resistance, lack of privacy
and difficulties in reaching households, which hindered
CHWs’ effectiveness. However, CHWs were commended for
their impact on community well-being, offering health
services, emergency support, food assistance and improved
healthcare accessibility.


The findings show that study participants from the Melusi
informal settlement had positive perceptions of CHWs,
highlighting their role as valuable resources in the
community. The positive perception findings of this study
align with the consistent evidence from previous research,
which has continually emphasised the favourable perceptions
of CHWs. [10] Inadequate communication disrupts operational
processes and fosters mistrust among various stakeholders
involved in patient care. [11] Community Health Workers are
often valued for their ability to communicate effectively with
community members and provide culturally appropriate
health education and support. [12] In this study, participants
praised CHWs for their communication skills and
engagement strategies. This emphasises the importance of
effective communication and rapport-building in CHWs’
work, which is consistent with the existing literature. [13] The
results indicate that positive communication, accessibility
and a community-centred approach contribute to a
favourable perception of CHWs within the community.


The CHWs were not only seen as information sharers but
also as supportive figures during health-related challenges in
the community. Their role and being trusted in the community
have been shown to be important in delivering health
promotion and behaviour change. [14] Participants in the study
expressed expectations for CHWs to provide access to health
services, advocate for health issues, offer guidance on
maintaining well-being and assist with educational support
for children. Other studies have also highlighted the varied
expectations of community members from CHWs, which
include providing healthcare services, advocating for health
issues and linking community members to healthcare and
social services. [11,14,15,16]


This serves as a reflection of the community’s desire for
proactive health promotion. It highlights the urge for
community members to be guided regarding healthier
lifestyles by CHWs.


The CHWs are often seen as a link connecting communities
and formal healthcare systems, addressing gaps in access
and service. [15] This expectation shows that CHWs go beyond
providing services, also helping to build communities and
connect them to health resources.


The study participants highlighted that the role of CHWs is
important, especially in promoting health in the informal
settlement of the City of Tshwane. The community sees
CHWs as health educators and are of the view that it is
important for them to share health information about health
issues faced by community members. This aligns with the


t



proactive role of CHWs in health promotion. The findings in
this study show that CHWs play an important role in
advising on medication adherence, offering advice during
household visits and providing essential health services. The
CHWs are often involved in a range of activities, including
disease prevention, health promotion and social support. [11,14,16]
Their proactive approach, including door-to-door visits and
delivering pills, ensures access to medications and healthcare
services, contributing significantly to community health. [11,16]


The positive impact of CHWs on community well-being,
including their role in providing essential health services,
promoting acceptance of health conditions and supporting
clinic visits, is well-documented in the literature. [11,17] The
CHWs have been shown to improve health outcomes,
increase healthcare access and empower communities to take
control of their health. [11,18] The results of this study show that
they provide not only health services but also emergency
support, food assistance, enhanced healthcare accessibility
and educational initiatives. In line with the other studies,
CHWs encourage individuals to seek treatment, promote
acceptance of health conditions, and support clinic visits and
medication adherence, particularly in cases related to HIV as
demonstrated in this study. [11,16]


Despite community members having positive perceptions
regarding CHWs, the study also identified several difficulties
that prevent CHWs from rendering services. These included
community resistance, a lack of privacy and confidentiality,
and difficulties in reaching households. This concurs with
what other studies have found, which is that CHWs encounter
various challenges in their role such as resource constraints, a
lack of recognition and inadequate support of the health
system. [16,19] The CHWs play a vital role in improving health
outcomes and reducing health differences in communities that
don’t have enough healthcare. [20] The however, often struggle
to make community members trust them, understand their
cultural beliefs and access resources to effectively carry out
their duties. [21,22] These challenges highlight the need for
strategies to support CHWs overcome the difficulties and
improving their effectiveness in the community.


The community members’ fear of breach of confidentiality
highlights the need to reinforce the importance of
confidentiality among CHWs and also raise awareness in
the community about the ethical standards CHWs maintain
when handling sensitive health information. Working on
protecting community confidentiality and addressing challenges
in open communication can further enhance the effectiveness
of CHWs in the community as suggested by a participant in
this study. Expectations for confidentiality emphasise the
ethical considerations in CHWs’ interactions. Participants
acknowledged CHWs’ engagement beyond healthcare.


This study shows that there are constraints in CHWs’
working hours, which create a barrier to reaching certain
community members. Having a different approach such as
CHWs working with flexible scheduling might help address
this challenge.


t



~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 8 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


t



Participants in the study from the informal settlements of the
City of Tshwane mentioned a wide range of health issues.
Communicable diseases such as TB, HIV, and STIs were
considered to be major health risks within the community.
Health interventions are required to enhance patient
outcomes and prevent the disease from spreading. [17 ] It is
necessary to increase health awareness and prevent these
illnesses because of the possible health risks associated with
health. [17] In addition to infectious diseases, NCDs such as
diabetes and hypertension were shown to be prevalent health
issues. The NCDs are becoming more prevalent because of
poor lifestyle choices and limited access to healthcare. [23]


To increase CHWs’ efficacy in promoting health in the City
of Tshwane’s informal settlements, study participants
offered several suggestions. A crucial suggestion was to
arrange community gatherings and workshops on health
education to increase understanding of the function of
CHWs and advance community health literacy. This
recommendation highlights the value of community
involvement and education in enhancing health outcomes
and giving residents the power to take charge of their
health. [15]


Participants recommended that in the community meetings,
residents should be reassured on the confidentiality of their
conversations held with between community member and
CHWs. This recommendation emphasises the value of
confidentiality and trust in healthcare interactions because
it can motivate residents to ask for assistance and be
transparent about their health concerns. [24]


Setting up focus groups to inform the public about healthrelated concerns and life skills was another suggestion. This
recommendation emphasises the value of communitybased learning and the part CHWs play in helping
community people gain a greater understanding of health
and well-being. [25]
## **Conclusion**

This study emphasises how important CHWs are in
promoting health in the district of the City of Tshwane
informal settlements particularly Melusi. The positive
perception of CHWs by community members highlights how
they are valuable resources in the community. The CHWs are
essential in addressing health challenges, even though CHWs
face challenges such as community resistance, hostility from
community members, concerns about confidentiality and
difficulties reaching households during non-working hours.
To improve the situation, participants recommended having
health education workshops, community meetings and
focus groups to raise community awareness and enhance
community understanding of CHWs’ roles. They also
suggested increasing the visibility of CHWs in the community
and hiring more CHWs. In general, CHWs play an important
role in preserving community access to health, raising health
awareness and improving overall community health and
well-being.


t


## **Strength and limitations**

Achieving data saturation in this study was crucial to
comprehensively capture the study topic, suggesting
minimal additional insights from further data collection.
The selection of participants was a strength, enhancing
representativeness and providing diverse perspectives on
CHWs in the community. Direct interaction with CHWs
and health promotion activities enriched understanding of
community views. Detailed descriptions of the study setting
and participant selection process bolstered the transferability
of findings, offering a thorough account of perceptions in
the Melusi informal settlement and facilitating comparisons
with other communities’ views on CHWs.


The study encountered logistical constraints in locating
participants’ addresses, particularly in Melusi, an informal
settlement where some residences lack formal addresses.
These challenges hindered the ability to effectively contact
and include all intended participants, potentially limiting the
study’s scope and generalisability.


The study may not have fully represented the whole
viewpoint about informal settlements in the City of Tshwane
because the focus was on participant’s perceptions. The
study may not have been as applicable to other informal
settlements with diverse environment or people because it
focussed on a specific informal settlement in the City of
Tshwane.
## **Implications**

Policy implications from the study highlight the need for
enhancing CHWs’ communication skills and engagement
strategies to effectively convey health information and
foster positive interactions with community members.
Policymakers should ensure that CHWs meet community
expectations by providing essential health services,
advocating for health issues and supporting comprehensive
care through referrals and educational support. Addressing
challenges such as limited working hours and community
resistance requires policies that expand capacity and
support systems of CHW, aiming to improve health
outcomes in managing prevalent health challenges such as
communicable diseases, NCDs and mental health issues.
## **Acknowledgements**

The authors would like to acknowledge the study
participants for their participation in this study. They would
also like to thank the field team in Melusi, the Community
Orientated Primary Care (COPC) research team for their
assistance in identifying participants as well as the COPC
research unit for resource support and funding. The authors
appreciate the Melusi community leaders for granting
permission to collect data in their area. The authors very
much appreciate the support of Miss Lethabo Phefadu for
helping with transcription and for assisting in making this
article a success.


t



~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


~~Page 9 of 9~~ Origin ~~al Research~~


**t**


t



**Competing interests**

The authors declare that they have no financial or personal
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced them
in writing this article.


**Authors’ contributions**

R.K.M. was primarily responsible for designing and
conducting the study, analysing data, and drafting the article.
S.N. contributed in planning the article and provided
revisions to enhance its quality.


**Funding information**

The Community Orientated Primary Care (COPC) research
unit provided funding support for the project. The funding
organisation was not involved in the study’s design, data
collection, analysis, interpretation and article.


**Data availability**

The data that support the findings of this study are available
on reasonable request from the corresponding author, S.N.


**Disclaimer**

The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of **t**
the authors and are the product of professional research. It
does not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of
any affiliated institution, funder, agency or that of the
publisher. The authors are responsible for this article’s
results, findings and content.
## **References**


1. Nxumalo N, Goudge J, Manderson L. Community health workers, recipients’

experiences and constraints to care in South Africa – A pathway to trust. AIDS
[Care. 2016;28(Sup4):61–71. https://doi.org/10.1080/09540121.2016.1195484](https://doi.org/10.1080/09540121.2016.1195484)

2. Mhlongo EM, Lutge E, Adepeju L. The roles, responsibilities and perceptions of

community health workers and ward-based primary health care outreach teams:
[A scoping review. Glob Health Action. 2020;13(1):1806526. https://doi.org/10.10](https://doi.org/10.1080/16549716.2020.1806526)
[80/16549716.2020.1806526](https://doi.org/10.1080/16549716.2020.1806526)

3. Rachlis B, Naanyu V, Wachira J, et al. Community perceptions of community

health workers (CHWs) and their roles in management for HIV, tuberculosis and
[hypertension in Western Kenya. PLoS One. 2016;11(2):e0149412. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0149412)
[org/10.1371/journal.pone.0149412](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0149412)

4. Makgalemane MR, Patrick S, Shirinde J. Respiratory conditions and health

symptoms associated with air pollution amongst children aged six years and
below in Melusi Informal Settlement, Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality, South
Africa: a cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2024 Jul 30;24(1):2038.

5. Saunders B, Sim J, Kingstone T, et al. Saturation in qualitative research: Exploring

its conceptualization and operationalization. Qual Quan. 2018;52:1893–1907.
[https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0574-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0574-8)


t



6. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are enough? An experiment

[with data saturation and variability. Field Methods. 2006;18(1):59–82. https://](https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05279903)
[doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05279903](https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05279903)

7. Guest G, MacQueen KM, Namey EE. Applied thematic analysis. Thousand Oaks:

Sage Publications; 2012.

8. Elo S, Kyngäs H. The qualitative content analysis process. J Adv Nurs.

[2008;62(1):107–115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.04569.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.04569.x)

9. Shenton AK. Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research

[projects. Educ Inform. 2004;22(2):63–75. https://doi.org/10.3233/EFI-2004-](https://doi.org/10.3233/EFI-2004-22201)
[22201](https://doi.org/10.3233/EFI-2004-22201)

10. Ngcobo S, Rossouw T. Acceptability of home-based HIV care offered by community

health workers in Tshwane District, South Africa: A survey. AIDS Patient Care STDS.
[2022;36(2):55–63. https://doi.org/10.1089/apc.2021.0216](https://doi.org/10.1089/apc.2021.0216)

11. Ngcobo S, Scheepers S, Mbatha N, Grobler E, Rossouw T. Roles, barriers, and

recommendations for community health workers providing community-based
HIV care in sub-Saharan Africa: A review. AIDS Patient Care STDS.
[2022;36(4):130–144. https://doi.org/10.1089/apc.2022.0020](https://doi.org/10.1089/apc.2022.0020)

12. Gopalan SS, Mohanty S, Das A. Assessing community health workers’ performance

motivation: A mixed-methods approach on India’s Accredited Social Health
[Activists (ASHA) programme. BMJ Open. 2012;2(5):e001557. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001557)
[org/10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001557](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001557)

13. Bhutta ZA, Lassi ZS, Pariyo G, Huicho L. Global experience of community health

workers for delivery of health related millennium development goals: A systematic
review, country case studies, and recommendations for integration into national
health systems. Global HealthWworkforce Alliance. 2010;1(249):61.

14. Kok MC, Broerse JE, Theobald S, Ormel H, Dieleman M, Taegtmeyer M.

Performance of community health workers: Situating their intermediary position
within complex adaptive health systems. Hum Resour Health. 2017;15:1–7.
[https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-017-0234-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-017-0234-z)

15. Perry HB, Zulliger R, Rogers MM. Community health workers in low-, middle-, and

high-income countries: An overview of their history, recent evolution, and current
[effectiveness. Ann Rev Public Health. 2014;35:399–421. https://doi.org/10.1146/](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032013-182354)
[annurev-publhealth-032013-182354](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032013-182354)

16. Mwai GW, Mburu G, Torpey K, Frost P, Ford N, Seeley J. Role and outcomes of

community health workers in HIV care in sub‐Saharan Africa: A systematic review.
[Afr J Reprod Gynaecol Endosc. 2013;16(1):18586. https://doi.org/10.7448/](https://doi.org/10.7448/IAS.16.1.18586)
[IAS.16.1.18586](https://doi.org/10.7448/IAS.16.1.18586)

17. Khan NH, Beg MM, Sarwar MZ, et al. Assessment of knowledge and at **t** iudes

related to HIV/aids among the population with increasing incidence rate. Cureus.
[2024;16(2):e53451. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.53451](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.53451)

18. Haines A, Sanders D, Lehmann U, et al. Achieving child survival goals: Potential

contribution of community health workers. lancet. 2007;369(9579):21212131.
[https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60325-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60325-0)

19. Seth A, Tomar S, Singh K, et al. Differential effects of community health worker

visits across social and economic groups in Uttar Pradesh, India: A link between
[social inequities and health disparities. Int J Equity Health. 2017;16:1–9. https://](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12939-017-0538-6)
[doi.org/10.1186/s12939-017-0538-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12939-017-0538-6)

20. Kok MC, Dieleman M, Taegtmeyer M, et al. Which intervention design factors

influence performance of community health workers in low-and middle-income
countries? A systematic review. Health Policy Plan. 2015;30(9):1207–1227.
[https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czu126](https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czu126)

21. Lehmann U, Van Damme W, Barten F, Sanders D. Task shifting: The answer to the

[human resources crisis in Africa? Hum Resour Health. 2009;7(1):1–4. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-7-49)
[org/10.1186/1478-4491-7-49](https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-7-49)

22. Ngcobo S, Rossouw T. “They come and knock at the gate until the neighbours see”.

Perceived barriers and benefits of implementing HIV care at the community level
[in tshwane district: A qualitative study. PLoS One. 2020;15(10):e0240740. https://](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240740)
[doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240740](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240740)

23. World Health Organization. Global action plan for the prevention and control of

noncommunicable diseases 2013–2020. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2013.

24. Semrau M, Evans-Lacko S, Alem A, et al. Strengthening mental health systems in

low-and middle-income countries: The emerald programme. BMC Med.
[2015;13:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-015-0309-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-015-0309-4)

25. Stepurko T, Pavlova M, Groot W. Overall satisfaction of health care users with the

quality of and access to health care services: A cross-sectional study in six central
[and eastern european countries. BMC Health Serv Res. 2016;16:1–13. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-016-1585-1)
[org/10.1186/s12913-016-1585-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-016-1585-1)


t



**t**


~~ht~~ t ~~[p://www.phcfm.org](http://www.phcfm.org)~~ Open Access


