Bioethical Inquiry (2017) 14:159–162
DOI 10.1007/s11673-016-9763-8


BOOK REVIEW

# The Biopolitics of Lifestyle: Foucault, Ethics and Healthy Choices


Christopher Mayes, 2016, Routledge
(Oxford and New York, 978-1-138-93386-6, 156 pp.)


Andrew Cooper


Received: 21 March 2016 /Accepted: 14 July 2016 /Published online: 22 December 2016
# Journal of Bioethical Inquiry Pty Ltd. 2016



Abstract Unlike many recent studies on the notion of
lifestyle, Christopher Mayes’ The Biopolitics of Lifestyle
balances theoretical rigour with empirical investigation
to problematize the use of lifestyle in public health
strategies. Not only does Mayes’ book expose the unjustified emphasis on individual autonomy undergirding
neoliberal strategies of governance and contemporary
ethical theory, it also marks a significant step forward in
enhancing our understanding of one of Foucault’s most
underappreciated concepts, the dispositif. In clearly
framing the import of Foucaultian analysis and placing
it against the backdrop of the obesity epidemic, Mayes
continues his contributions towards a productive space
wherein practitioners, social theorists, and ethicists can
genuinely and self-reflectively exchange knowledges in
order to respond to living issues of ethical import.


Keywords Biopolitics [. ] Obesity [. ] Ethics [. ] Foucault [.]
Dispositif


The Biopolitics of Lifestyle by Christopher Mayes is a
confrontational book. Unlike many recent studies,
which examine lifestyle as an empirical phenomenon
consisting of individual choices, Mayes frames his empirical investigation of lifestyle through a theoretically
grounded methodology. The method he employs draws


A. Cooper (*)
Universität Bonn, Internationales Zentrum für Philosophie,
Poppelsdorfer Allee 28, 53115 Bonn, Germany
e-mail: andrew.cooper@uni-bonn.de



from one of Michel Foucault’s more neglected critical
tools: the dispositif. The dispositif examines individual
choices through a set of analytical lenses attentive to the
Bnetwork of power, knowledge, and subjectivity [that]
enables certain practices, bodies and lives to be visible
and governable^ (Mayes 2016, 19). Focusing on the
recent Bobesity epidemic^—that is, the heightened
sense of urgency surrounding obesity in public health
campaigns and print and social media—Mayes examines
how lifestyle came to be viewed as Bthe cause of potential
public health, economic and nation security catastrophes^
(Mayes 2016, 2). When lifestyle is understood as
Bcausally responsible^ for obesity, it simultaneously
becomes Bthe source of salvation,^ justifying social
marketing campaigns that enfold the public into the task
of normalizing their everyday lives for the betterment of
the whole. This use of lifestyle has naturally caught the
attention of several Foucaultian theorists, who, like
Mayes, employ Foucault ’s conception of
governmentality—the Bcombination of technologies of
domination and technologies of the self^ (Mayes 2016,
25)—to critique the use of coercive forces on human
bodies. Yet, unlike these theorists, Mayes’ analysis does
not reduce governmentality to coercion. Rather, his attention to Foucault’s dispositif leads him to examine
governmentality as a much more diffuse set of technologies used to construct Ban environment in which individuals can make ‘healthy lifestyle choices’^ (Mayes 2016, 2).
Mayes’ contention is that by placing individual choice as
the single causal locale by which lifestyle is construed,
public health is depoliticized, removed from the entangled
networks that enable the formation of lifestyles.


160 Bioethical Inquiry (2017) 14:159–162



The confrontational nature of Mayes’ book lies in the
fact that it does not simply frame lifestyle as a new shape
of governmentality. Mayes’s aim is to reveal the
decentralized, plural nature of power that enables lifestyle, thereby identifying the causal networks that are
truly efficacious in matters of community health. He
advocates that the governmental technologies used to
isolate individual choice from the politically significant
networks that enable lifestyle choices be contested
through a process of Bresubjectification and selfmaking^ (2016, 143, emphasis original). This process
consists of a transformed relation to the networks that
are obscured by the use of lifestyle in public health
strategies, reframing choices as dangerous moments of
self-care by which the norms and practices basic to
society are contested and established.
Why resist a regime targeted at promoting health?
The central provocation of Mayes’ book is that
Foucault’s notion of dispositif problematizes the individualist ontology undergirding contemporary public
health strategies, thus opening a more complex ethical
field in which these strategies should be grounded,
formulated, and mobilized. In the first chapter, Mayes
examines the recent focus on obesity in bioethical literature to Billustrate the way the logics of lifestyle allows
certain interventions to prevent harms seem obvious and
acceptable^ (2016, 11). Despite having a Bpowerful
rhetorical influence^ in marketing and governance,
however, Mayes argues that lifestyle is a deeply
Bambiguous^ term (2016, 10). The diverse uses of lifestyle Bestablish a network through which the everyday
habits and activities of individuals are made visible and
governable^ (2016, 10). What is distinctly Bbiopolitical^
about the contemporary use of lifestyle is that it shifts
Bfrom a socialized welfare that purports to secure the
many, to an individualized welfare that secures those
who are able care for themselves^ (2016, 10). It Bmakes
visible those who are responsible and those who purportedly harm society^: those who live healthily are folded
into the population to be protected, while those who fail
to adopt such choices risk Bimplicit or explicit exclusion
from care^ (Mayes 2016, 10).
Mayes employs Foucault’s dispositif to examine this
construction of lifestyle in contemporary ethical theory.
When the costly issues associated with obesity are understood in terms of the Bindividual as the primary unity
through which to understand social interactions^ (2016,
12), ethicists such as Peter Singer and Daniel Callahan
argue on the grounds of the principle of harm that



intervention becomes not only possible but also a requisite of a just society. When understood through the
dispositif, however, Singer and Callahan merely describe the visible surface of an enabling network—
individual choice—that is contingent on the Bstructural
factors^ in which it is embedded, factors such as Bpoverty,
crime and education^ (Mayes 2016, 15 and 16). Here
Mayes’ dry humour adds to the force of his argument: he
cites the pedantic references made by ethicists to bourgeois
modes of consumption—including the size of Bairplane
seats^ (Singer), the use of Bautomatic garage door
openers^ and Bgolf carts^ (Callahan), and the consumption
of Bmicrowave dinners^ (Holland et al.), which supposedly contribute to obesity—grounding his broader critique of
the neoliberal preoccupation with individual patterns of
consumption at the expense of structural analysis. Mayes’
analytic can be summarized in the following conditional: if
these so-called harmful practices are not simply autonomous lifestyle choices but rather practices of the self that
are embedded in tangled networks of power, then Bthe
strategies targeting the individual^ are ethically unjustified
(2016, 16).
The task of this book is thus to demonstrate the
validity of the sufficient clause of the conditional. In
the second chapter, Mayes makes some inroads into this
task, arguing that Bthe lifestyle network problematizes
individual choice as a security issue requiring
biopolitical governance^ (2016, 33). Here Mayes interrogates the notion of responsibility employed by the
likes of David Cameron, former U.S. Surgeon General
Richard Carmona, and the Australian Measure Up campaign that has been wielded to produce Blines of visibility and enunciation,^ making it possible to Bsee^ and
Bspeak^ of the choices of the individual as issues of
security. This emphasis on Bindividual freedom and
responsible choice^ depoliticizes the issue of obesity,
intensifying and narrowing Bthe community that is cared
for and secured^ (Mayes 2016, 36).
Chapter three examines the rhetoric deployed by
politicians, journalists, and public health officials to
construct an Burgent need^ to respond to the issue
of obesity (Mayes 2016, 55). To bring such an issue into
public visibility, B[s]trategic networks of power, knowledge and subjectification are mobilized^ (Mayes 2016,
55). Mayes’ use of the passive voice here is important;
there is no single locus of agency but rather neoliberal
governance is interwoven with epidemiology and heath
policy to make daily practices and choices visible as
biopolitcal targets. Epidemiology shifts from targeting


Bioethical Inquiry (2017) 14:159–162 161



disease to targeting lifestyle. It is transformed into the
examination of risks associated with the Blifestyle
choice^ of the individual, showing that we are all vulnerable to the problem of obesity. Thus scientific knowledge
is used to demonstrate that it is Bthe responsibility of the
individual to modify behaviours through correct (i.e.
healthy) choice^ (Mayes 2016, 59). The shift in emphasis
from preventing disease to promoting health is not limited
to the science of epidemiology, Mayes argues, but is
extended in government policy in countries such as the
United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia, placing the individual as the Bonly actor able to reduce the
economic and social costs of chronic disease^ (2016, 62,
emphasis original). By constructing the individual Bas a
free and rational chooser,^ it is then justified to think that
we simply require Bcorrect information to choose the
healthy choice^ (Mayes 2016, 66). The influence of
Bsystemic violence on the capacity to freely choose^ is
occluded by Bthe continual rejection of research demonstrating the social determinants of health^ (Mayes 2016,
66, emphasis original).
Here Mayes’ argument could be strengthened by a
deeper analysis of such research—research that provides
empirical demonstration of the social determinants of
health—if he is to convince his more sceptical readers.
This is to say that Foucault’s dispositif assumes the validity of the sufficient clause of the above conditional but
does not constitute an argument for it. For those sceptical
of the thesis that the entangled structures in which lifestyle
choices are embedded are ethically significant, such as
Singer and Callahan, the veracity of the sufficient clause
requires empirical substantiation if the argument is to
convince in such a way as to alter ethical practice.
Mayes’ sensitivity to the interdependence of theory
and practice does, however, avoid the pitfalls of studies
that confuse emergent technologies of governmentality
as the expression of theory, such as those that construe
the government control of lifestyle in terms of alienation
from pure subjectivity. In chapters four and five, Mayes
demonstrates that theory and empirical study must be
held in a dynamic feedback loop, each informing our
analysis of the other. In chapter four, he begins with a
theoretical focus, broadening Foucault’s dispositif to
practices of consumption through the work of Pierre
Bourdieu, Henri Lefebvre, and Guy Debord. This allows
him to develop a model of subjectivity as an agonistic
locus of individual consumption and biopolitical rationalities that appears to us through everyday consumption. Mayes then grounds this argument in chapter five



through case studies of the Bcacophony of voices that
issue lifestyle guidance in print and social media, television, and mobile devices^ (Mayes 2016, 94). Within this
cacophony emerge Bbiopolitical pastors^ (2016, 108)
who hear confessions, circulate expert knowledge, and
develop techniques to shape subjects in the lifestyle
network. The lines between commercial interest, advertising, and government programs become blurred as apps
and smart devices are used as mechanisms to Bknow,
construct and modify the self^ (2016, 96).
In chapter six, BStyles of Resistance,^ Mayes examines
Bthe possibility of resisting and critiquing health and the
idea of a healthy lifestyle,^ shifting the focus of the book
from critical diagnosis to a positive exploration of how
this diagnosis affects practice (2016, 114). If governance
now concerns lifestyle, then resistance cannot be the task
of the individual but must operate Bwithin the lifestyle
network,^ forming a Blifestyle of resistance^ (2016, 115).
Mayes does not seek to take his readers Bbeyond lifestyle^
to a Bpure^ existence but rather to empower them to
Bconstruct a lifestyle that disrupts and disables the
enabling network of lifestyle^ (2016, 115). This is no
simple task, for any attempt to resist lifestyle norms
requires Btactful and strategic negotiation of disciplinary
and exclusionary effects of biopolitical governance^
(2016, 115). Here Mayes’ reading of Foucault is strikingly
original, demonstrating how a Foucaultian model of
resistance is not resistance per se but rather a transformed
relation to the entangled lines of power in which our selfunderstanding is fashioned. Mayes’ analysis itself is such
a model: by revealing the contingency of prevailing
governmentalities of health, new possibilities become
open. Unlike conventional Foucaultian approaches, this
analysis does not limit itself to the body as a site of
resistance but extends Foucault’s dispositif to advance a
Bpluralist^ approach wherein, in Bconjunction with practices of critique and counter-conduct, the unpredictability
of bodies can be guided in a more precise manner against
governmentality and the norms of behaviour^ (Mayes
2016, 123). This entails the mobilization of various modes
of self-care in Bthe art of not being governed quite so
much^ (Mayes 2016, 126).
The final chapter brings the diagnostic and positive
dimensions of the book together by grounding the site of
resistance in the context of obesity in Brelations of care
with others^ (Mayes 2016, 133). Such resistance Bis
everyday, restless and communal^ (Mayes 2016, 134).
We are not Btrapped^ by the powers, politics, or subjectivities though which the dispositif thrusts dissident


162 Bioethical Inquiry (2017) 14:159–162



bodies into visage. Rather, these are unstable, contestable, thoroughly plastic sites in which control can be
transformed into resistance through the collective effort
to foster a self-reflective relation to the networks that
enable our choices.
That Mayes’ book is confrontational is evident in the
deeply realist alternative it offers to contemporary studies on lifestyle. Against the ethicists who are complicit
with governmental practices that establish the individual
as an autonomous locus of choice on the one hand and
the Bhealthists^ who are Bsuspicious of state
interference^ on the other, Mayes proposes a Bmore
sensitive set of analytic and conceptual tools … to
address a different set of questions that deal with the
role of lifestyle in political disputes over individual
freedom, population security, and the governance of
the future^ (2016, 2). He does not argue that governments should refrain from interfering with individual
choices. Instead, by questioning and interrogating this
procedure, Mayes hopes to


open spaces for different norms of life that enable
individuals to relate with others in styles and ways
that allow a diversity of bodies and experiences of
health that are not governed so much by a plurality
of means toward a limited number of alien and
abstract ends (2016, 7).


Mayes’ point is that the cacophony of voices that
frame lifestyle as the central locus of personal and social



health—from mainstream dieting programs such as
WeightWatchers, to print media such as Prevention,
and to diet-monitoring apps such as The Eatery—are
not Bbad^ but Bdangerous^; they have Bthe potential for
present avenues of resistance and counter-conduct^
(2016, 140). These practices make us more aware of
disciplinary procedures, thereby placing us in a better
position to resist them.
Mayes’ book will surprise both bioethicists, with his
theoretically charged diagnostic, and Foucaultian theorists, with his engaged and empirically driven analysis.
Not only does it expose the unjustified emphasis on
individual autonomy undergirding neoliberal strategies
of governance and contemporary ethical theory, it also
marks a significant step forward in enhancing our understanding of one of Foucault’s most underappreciated
concepts, the dispositif. In clearly framing the import of
Foucaultian analysis and placing it against the backdrop
of the obesity epidemic, Mayes continues his contributions towards a productive space wherein practitioners,
social theorists, and ethicists can genuinely and selfreflectively exchange knowledges in order to respond
to living issues of ethical import.


References


Mayes, C. 2016. The biopolitics of lifestyle: Foucault, ethics and
healthy choices. Oxford and New York: Routledge.


