Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544

## RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access

# Cardiovascular medication utilization and adherence among adults living in rural and urban areas: a systematic review and meta-analysis


Gaetanne K Murphy [1], Finlay A McAlister [2], Daniala L Weir [1,3], Lisa Tjosvold [3] and Dean T Eurich [1,3*]


Abstract


Background: Rural residents face numerous barriers to healthcare access and studies suggest poorer health
outcomes for rural patients. Therefore we undertook a systematic review to determine if cardiovascular medication
utilization and adherence patterns differ for rural versus urban patients.

Methods: A comprehensive search of major electronic datasets was undertaken for controlled clinical trials and
observational studies comparing utilization or adherence to cardiovascular medications in rural versus urban adults
with cardiovascular disease or diabetes. Two reviewers independently identified citations, extracted data, and
evaluated quality using the STROBE checklist. Risk estimates were abstracted and pooled where appropriate using
random effects models. Methods and reporting were in accordance with MOOSE guidelines.

Results: Fifty-one studies were included of fair to good quality (median STROBE score 17.5). Although pooled
unadjusted analyses suggested that patients in rural areas were less likely to receive evidence-based cardiovascular
medications (23 studies, OR 0.88, 95% CI 0.79, 0.98), pooled data from 21 studies adjusted for potential confounders
indicated no rural–urban differences (adjusted OR 1.02, 95% CI 0.91, 1.13). The high heterogeneity observed (I [2] = 97%)
was partially explained by treatment setting (hospital, ambulatory care, or community-based sample), age, and disease.
Adherence did not differ between urban versus rural patients (3 studies, OR 0.94, 95% CI 0.39, 2.27, I [2] = 91%).

Conclusions: We found no consistent differences in rates of cardiovascular medication utilization or adherence among
adults with cardiovascular disease or diabetes living in rural versus urban settings. Higher quality evidence is needed to
determine if differences truly exist between urban and rural patients in the use of, and adherence to, evidence-based
medications.


Keywords: Cardiovascular diseases, Rural population, Urban population, Medication adherence, Drug utilization



Background
Rural and urban communities have distinct characteristics
in terms of demographics, social, and physical environments, and may vary in access to healthcare facilities and
services. Rural residents tend to be older and are more
likely to be obese, have less education, and lower income
than urban residents [1-6]. Rural populations also have a
higher prevalence of chronic conditions such as diabetes
and heart disease [1,7-9]. Some studies have shown worse


[* Correspondence: deurich@ualberta.ca](mailto:deurich@ualberta.ca)
12-040 Li Ka Shing Center for Health Research Innovation, School of Public
Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E1, Canada
3Alliance for Canadian Health Outcomes Research in Diabetes, School of
Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article



health outcomes among rural populations, including a
higher risk of cardiovascular-related morbidity and mortality compared to urban populations [3,4,10-13]. For
example, in Canada, mortality from circulatory diseases is
higher in rural than urban communities, as is the risk
of heart failure-related mortality, hospitalization and
emergency department visits [4,10,11]. Similarly, in the
UK a higher risk of in-hospital death due to ischemic
heart disease has been observed among rural residents

[12], and in Australia, mortality due to six major chronic
diseases consistently increased in areas that were increasingly remote [13]. Collectively, these characteristics
suggest increased healthcare needs for those living in rural
communities.



© 2014 Murphy et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
[Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
[Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)
unless otherwise stated.


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 2 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



However, rural residents report several barriers to
accessing healthcare including transportation difficulties
and distance to care, social isolation, financial constraints, limited health care facilities (hospitals and pharmacies), physician shortages, and lack of access to
specialist care [14-19]. Indeed, in the US, rural areas
contain 19% of the population but only 11% of the physician workforce [15], and the ratio of specialists per
population consistently declines as locations become
smaller and more remote [15,17]. The lack of access to
primary care physicians, specialists, or health care facilities
has been postulated to result in decreased prescribing of
evidence based medications. However, a previous systematic review found no clear rural–urban difference in the
prevalence or intensity of prescription drug use in older
adults – although that review included a wide variety of
health conditions and medications [20]. It is possible that
important differences may exist for certain disease states
or medication conditions. As a result, we conducted a
systematic review that evaluated whether cardiovascularrelated medication utilization and adherence patterns
differ for rural versus urban adults with cardiovascular
disease or diabetes. These two disease states were selected
as they affect a large number of patients, are associated
with high morbidity and mortality, often require multiple
medications to manage, and outcomes are known to be
different between rural and urban patients [21].


Methods
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Controlled clinical trials or observational studies were
included if they enrolled adults with established cardiovascular disease (atrial fibrillation, hypertension, heart
failure, coronary artery disease) or diabetes, and reported
cardiovascular medication use or adherence patterns for patients living in rural versus urban communities. Medications
of interest included acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), antithrombotic, anticoagulant, antihypertensive (including angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB)), or lipid lowering agents. The research
question, inclusion and exclusion criteria, and review
methods were outlined in a protocol developed a priori according to the PRISMA guidelines [22].
Since the definition of rural and urban varied substantially between studies, we a priori defined populations
described as urban, city dwelling, or metropolitan in the
primary publication as urban. Conversely, rural descriptors included town, village, country dwelling, nonmetropolitan or remote communities. Any definition of
adherence or persistence used in primary studies was accepted. Only full text, peer reviewed articles, were included. Studies evaluating the use of medications for
acute management, such as during hospitalization, were
excluded, as were studies conducted in developing



countries where management approaches may be substantially different. The populations of interest were those
with established cardiovascular disease or diabetes, in whom
several evidence-based medications are recommended for
use. Two researchers (GKM, DLW) independently screened
all studies and extracted all data using pre-defined forms and
definitions, and disagreements were resolved through discussion, or by a third researcher (DTE).


Literature search strategy
A comprehensive search strategy implemented by a research librarian was done in April 2012 in the following
electronic databases: MEDLINE®, PubMed, Embase,
International Pharmaceutical Abstracts, CINAHL, and
Web of Science® and reference lists of included articles
were also manually searched. Previously identified included studies were searched in Scopus to gather additional subject headings. No language, study design or
date restrictions were applied. The MEDLINE® search
strategy is listed in (Additional file 1: Table S1).


Data extraction and quality assessment
Studies were evaluated for bias, and the STROBE checklist
was used to assess the quality of reporting [23]. Study authors were contacted for missing information on rural–urban
comparisons, and in two cases additional data were provided
(unpublished data V. Maio 2012, I. Carey 2011). Both unadjusted and adjusted data were abstracted or calculated
where possible [24]. If more than one adjusted analysis was
reported, the analysis that adjusted for the most confounders
was extracted, and medication use data for patients without
contraindications to treatment were preferred over populations that may have included patients who were not eligible
for a specific therapy. Where possible, studies reporting multiple rural or urban populations were combined.


Data analysis methods
To summarize the effects of rural and urban location on
medication utilization or adherence both unadjusted and
adjusted pooled effects were calculated. As we expected
heterogeneity between studies, we pooled effect estimates using a random effects model with inverse variance weighting and Review Manager 5.1 software [25].
Heterogeneity was assessed using the I [2] statistic with an
I [2] statistic >50% being considered as moderate heterogeneity. There was no a priori degree of heterogeneity
that precluded pooling. For studies reporting multiple
outcomes within the same cohort [e.g., % receiving betablockers (BB) and % receiving an ACEI], a pooled estimate of the odds of treatment were calculated using
methods recommended by Borgenstein et al. [26] that
accounts for the fact that patients within each outcome
are not mutually exclusive (i.e., a patient may have received both a BB and an ACEI). Since the correlation of


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 3 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



outcomes is unknown, we used a moderate correlation
of 0.5 with sensitivity analyses using 0.25, 0.75 or 1 and
found there was little impact on the results. Subgroup
analyses were further conducted to explore the robustness of our results and potential sources of heterogeneity. Studies reporting data not suitable for meta-analysis
(e.g. outcomes other than OR, or with missing data)
were summarized narratively. Publication bias was
assessed using funnel plots and Egger’s test.


Results
A total of 11092 citations were identified in the literature
search and 51 unique studies (described in 52 publications), met the inclusion criteria (Figure 1) [2,8,9,27-75].
Fifteen studies were cohort studies and 36 were cross sectional or repeat cross sectional studies (Additional file 1:
Table S2). The included studies were published over a
21-year time span (1990 to 2011) and had quality scores
based on the STROBE checklist that ranged from 8.5 to
21 (median 17.5) out of a total of 22 possible items (0.5
points given for partial reporting). Two reports provided



data on the same study [44,48], and six studies included
data for more than one patient cohort [43,49,54,66,71,72].
Thus, 58 patient populations (or cohorts) were included in
our study. Two studies were in a language other than
English and were translated using on-line resources and
local expertise [37,70]. There was good agreement between
reviewers on study selection (kappa 0.82, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 0.75 to 0.90).

Patients were selected from a hospital setting in 12 studies, from ambulatory care practices in 17 studies, and in 22
studies, patients were selected from population-based or
community-dwelling samples. Exploring rural–urban differences was the primary objective of 18 studies (35%)

[2,27,28,30,31,35,36,39,43,44,49,51,54,59,68,69,71,73]. Seven
studies reported medication adherence (the proportion of
doses taken as prescribed over a specific time period) or
persistence (the length of continuous treatment) [76], and
47 reported outcomes related to medication utilization.
Among the studies, there were substantial variations in
how medication utilization or adherence to medications
was assessed. Overall, 16 studies included patient selfreport, 31 studies included data from medical records or
registries, and 5 studies were conducted using administrative databases. Nineteen studies reported crude utilization
or adherence outcome data only [8,28,35-37,39,40,50,51,
53,54,63,64,67,68,71,73-75].

Included studies varied in their characteristics (Additional
file 1: Table S2). Studies ranged in sample size from 32 to
approximately one million and were conducted in a range
of areas including the US (30 studies), Europe (14), Canada
(5) and Australia (2). Patient populations included those
with acute myocardial infarction or coronary artery disease
(18 studies), hypertension (16), diabetes (8), chronic heart
failure (6), atrial fibrillation (5), or mixed cardiovascular disease populations (5). The average age of study participants
ranged from 42 to 80 years, and 28% to 63% were female.


Medication utilization
Forty seven (92%) studies [2,8,9,27-36,38-47,49,51-69,
71-73,75] evaluated cardiovascular medication utilization
with 20 (39%) studies specifically evaluating utilization
of ASA or other anti-thrombotic agents, 34 (67%) evaluating antihypertensive use, and 11 (22%) evaluating the
use of lipid lowering agents (Additional file 1: Table S3).
Substantial variation in the use of cardiovascular medications was observed between studies and between rural
versus urban sub-populations within each study. Indeed,
the absolute difference in the utilization of cardiovascular medications ranged from −46% to +4% in rural
versus urban patients for ASA or other anti-thrombotic
drugs, −37% to +25% for antihypertensive drugs, and −45%
to +8% for lipid lowering agents. Of the 47 studies that
evaluated cardiovascular medication use, sufficient data
for pooling were available in 34 studies (39 separate


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 4 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



cohorts as two cohorts were included in three studies

[43,66,72] and three cohorts in one study [71]). In the unadjusted pooled analyses (23 studies) [27-29,35,36,38,39,
41,43,44,46,47,51,53,55-58,64,68,71,73,75], patients in rural
areas with cardiovascular disease or diabetes were less
likely to receive evidence-based cardiovascular drug
therapy compared to urban residents (pooled unadjusted
OR 0.88, 95% CI 0.79, 0.98, p = 0.02; I [2] = 97%) (Table 1).



However, among the 21 studies that adjusted for potential
confounders [9,27,29,34,38,41-45,47,52,55,56,58,60-62,66,
69,72] pooled analysis indicated no statistically significant
difference between rural and urban patients in the use of
cardiovascular medications (pooled adjusted OR 1.02, 95%
CI 0.91 to 1.13, p = 0.77, I [2] = 97%) (Figure 2). In both analyses there was substantial heterogeneity between studies.
Although numerous subgroup analyses by setting, drug



Table 1 Meta-analysis of medication utilization and adherence outcomes

Analysis N cohorts* Rural/urban OR of I [2] (%) Subgroup
treatment (95% CI) difference


Cardiovascular medication utilization


Overall - unadjusted 26 0.88 (0.79, 0.98) 97 NA


Overall - adjusted 23 1.02 (0.91, 1.13) 97 NA


Subgroup analysis – adjusted


Setting


Community or population-based 8 1.15 (1.06, 1.25) 71 P < 0.0001


Hospital 6 0.87 (0.83, 0.92) 34


Ambulatory care practice 9 1.02 (0.85, 1.24) 78


Drug class


Antithrombotic or anticoagulant 9 1.00 (0.88, 1.14) 88 P = 0.62


Antihypertensive 16 1.03 (0.90, 1.17) 92


Lipid lowering agent 4 0.94 (0.83, 1.07) 37


Disease


Atrial fibrillation 3 0.83 (0.59, 1.16) 67 P = 0.0001


Cardiovascular disease 11 0.95 (0.88, 1.03) 67


Hypertension 6 1.07 (0.87, 1.33) 79


Diabetes 3 1.21 (1.12, 1.31) 76


Age (study mean or median)


<65 years 8 1.15 (1.04, 1.26) 80 P = 0.005


≥65 years 12 0.98 (0.88, 1.08) 70


Not reported 3 0.89 (0.77, 1.02) 64


Country


US 18 1.01 (0.92, 1.10) 87 P = 0.67


Non-US 5 1.05 (0.88, 1.26) 88


Publication Year


1999-2005 7 1.06 (0.91, 1.22) 76 P = 0.66


2006-2011 16 1.01 (0.88, 1.15) 98


Data source


Administrative data 2 1.17 (0.97, 1.41) 87 P = 0.19


Medical record 14 0.97 (0.87, 1.08) 86


Patient self-report 7 1.07 (0.93, 1.22) 72


Cardiovascular medication adherence


N Rural/urban OR of I [2] (%) Subgroup
treatment (95% CI) difference


Overall - unadjusted 4 0.94 (0.39, 2.27) 91 NA


*Data from 23 and 21 studies were included in the unadjusted and adjusted analyses, respectively: Ellis [43], Rice [66], Wan [71], and Williams [72] provided data
for more than one cohort. CI = confidence interval; NA = not applicable; OR = odds ratio.


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 5 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



class, disease, age, country, and publication year were
undertaken, similar results were observed and these factors only partially explained some of the variation between
studies (Table 1; Figures 2 and 3). Moreover, when studies
were categorized according to how the outcome was
assessed (patient self-report, medical chart review, or
administrative data), similar results were observed (Table 1).
Additional analyses by study quality, for countries with
universal health care systems, and for specific drugs,
such as ACEI/ARB, also found similar findings (Additional
file 1: Table S4). Among studies reporting data not suitable
for meta-analysis, the findings were also consistent in that
there was no clear trend towards a reduction or increase
in cardiovascular medication utilization between rural and
urban patients [2,8,30-33,40,49,54,59,63,65,67].
Publication bias was assessed by visually examining funnel plots and no obvious asymmetry was noted (Egger’s
p value = 0.98).


Medication adherence or persistence
Six (12%) studies [29,37,46,70,73,74] evaluated cardiovascular medication adherence and two (4%) studies

[46,50] evaluated medication persistence. Adherence was
measured as the percentage of doses taken [73], the proportion of patients with a medication possession ratio



≥0.8 [46], and was undefined in three studies [37,70,74].
Persistence was measured as the proportion of patients
remaining on the same [46,50] or any treatment [46] at
the end of the follow up. In five studies, the drugs evaluated were antihypertensive agents, one study evaluated
heart failure medications [73], and one assessed ASA or
ACEI/ARB adherence [29].
Cardiovascular medication adherence or persistence
findings were inconsistent across studies (Additional file 1:
Table S3). The absolute difference in proportion adherent
or persistent with medications ranged from −41% to +8%
for rural versus urban patients. The odds of treatment
persistence were significantly higher in rural versus
urban patients in one report (adjusted OR 1.28, 95% CI
1.25, 1.32) [46], but was not statistically different in a
second study (OR 0.96, 95% CI 0.55, 1.67) [50], Medication adherence data from three studies (4 cohorts) were
pooled and showed no statistically significant difference
between rural and urban patients (unadjusted OR 0.94,
95% CI 0.39, 2.27, p = 0.89, I [2] = 91%) Table 1 [29,37,70].
In two other reports with data not suitable for metaanalysis, medication adherence was significantly higher
in one study (92% versus 83% of doses taken, p = 0.01)

[73], and significantly lower in the other (10% versus 17%
of patients compliant, p < 0.01) [74], for rural versus urban


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 6 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



patients, based on unadjusted data. The three studies
reporting treatment adherence adjusted for confounders
reported adherence to be significantly higher in rural
patients (OR medication possession ratio ≥0.8: antihypertensive agents 1.2, 95% CI 1.1, 1.3; ASA 1.14, 95% CI
1.10, 1.18; ACEI/ARB 1.18 95% CI 1.14, 1.23) or rural
men (OR adherent 4.0, 95% CI 1.1, 13.9) [29,46,70].


Discussion
Our systematic review of the literature found that rural
patients were 12% less likely to receive cardiovascular
medications than urban patients in unadjusted analyses;
however, pooling of data adjusted for patient, practitioner or other factors revealed no differences in the
proportions of rural and urban patients receiving therapy.
This suggests that differences in these characteristics
between rural and urban residents are largely responsible for the discrepancies in medication use observed
and is consistent with previous studies showing important differences in the demographics, health behaviors,
and overall health of people living in rural and urban
areas [1,3,4,7]. In this review, many of the included



reports provided little data on the demographics or comorbidities of the rural and urban patient groups, which
hindered our ability to assess the similarity of these populations. As a result, it is difficult to draw conclusions from
those studies that reported only unadjusted rural–urban
comparisons.
When medication utilization data were pooled, substantial between-study heterogeneity was observed (I [2] = 97%).
Some of this variability could be explained by differences in the setting (hospital, ambulatory care practice
or community-based sample), age, and disease state.
While most studies adjusted for some clinical characteristics, only some controlled for socioeconomic factors
that could also have impacted medication use. Indeed
only fourteen studies [27,32,34,42,43,45,47,52,57,58,61,
62,66,69] reported adjustment for health insurance and
previous studies have shown patients with a chronic
condition who lack medication insurance are less likely
to take medications or frequently skip doses due to cost

[52,66,77].
Similarly, we found no consistent relationship between
rural residence and cardiovascular medication adherence


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 7 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



or persistence rates based on unadjusted data. The adjusted analysis suggested higher adherence and persistence
for rural residents, although there were few studies
reporting these outcomes. Rural–urban differences in
other health behaviors, such as smoking, exercise, and
consumption of fruits and vegetables have been reported

[4], and considering the link between adherence and positive health outcomes [78], further study is warranted.
Although we conducted an exhaustive search for literature and conducted our systematic review in accordance to
the highest reporting standards, our review is not without
limitations. Firstly, studies evaluating differences in urban
versus rural settings within subgroup analyses may not have
been easily identified. Second, as in any systematic review,
the findings are limited by the quality of the individual
studies. Potential limitations included reporting bias [32,
33,40,41,45,49,51,54,71,72], selection bias [9,35,54], lack
of generalizability [9,28,36,37,39,50,51,59,71,73,74], limited
sample size [28,36,37,39,50,64,73], no adjustment for
confounders [8,28,35-37,40,50,54,64,74,75], and poor reporting (STROBE score below the 25th percentile)

[8,28,36,37,40,44,50-52,54,59,64,70,71,74]. Third, we accepted a broad range of definitions for rural and urban
populations, which may have affected study results.
In 25 studies [8,28,34,36,37,40-43,45,46,50,52,53,55-60,
64-66,72,74] no clear definition of rural and urban
were provided and various definitions were used in the
remaining studies. It is possible some of the heterogeneity observed in our pooled analysis is related to these
differences in definitions, although subgroup analysis by
studies with defined and undefined rural populations
showed similar results. Fourth, between-study heterogeneity was high and not fully explained despite multiple subgroup analyses by setting, drug class, disease, age, country,
publication year, and data source (self-report, administrative or medical records). Moreover, clinical indications
and classification of disease may also have changed over
time increasing the heterogeneity between studies. Last,
our review only included adults with established cardiovascular disease as medication utilization for secondary
prevention was expected to be high within patients; thus,
improving the power to detect differences if differences
exist between rural and urban patients. Moreover, as
cardiovascular medications are widely prescribed medications in the general adult population, our results
would be expected to be highly generalizable.


Conclusions
In conclusion, we found no consistent relationship between rural versus urban residence and utilization of, or
adherence with evidence-based cardiovascular medications among adults with cardiovascular disease or diabetes. There was substantial between-study variation
that was only partially explained by the setting, age, and



disease. Higher quality evidence is needed to determine
if differences in cardiovascular medication utilization and
adherence between urban and rural patients truly exist.


Additional file


[Additional file 1: The supplementary material includes Tables S1-S4,](http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2458-14-544-S1.docx)
the literature search strategy, summary of the included study
characteristics and results, and the supplementary meta-analyses.


Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.


Authors’ contributions
GKM and DLW screened, extracted and assessed the quality of studies. GKM
conducted the meta-analysis. LT conducted the literature search and prepared
the bibliography. GKM, DTE and FAM drafted the report. All authors had full
access to all of the data (including statistical reports and tables) in the study
and can take responsibility for the integrity of the data and accuracy of the
data analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Author details
12-040 Li Ka Shing Center for Health Research Innovation, School of Public
Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E1, Canada. [2] Division of
General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. [3] Alliance for Canadian Health
Outcomes Research in Diabetes, School of Public Health, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.


Received: 20 November 2013 Accepted: 27 May 2014
Published: 2 June 2014


References
1. Krishna S, Gillespie KN, McBride TM: Diabetes burden and access to
preventive care in the rural United States. J Rural Health 2010, 26:3–11.
2. Vanasse A, Courteau J, Cohen AA, Orzanco MG, Drouin C: Rural–urban
disparities in the management and health issues of chronic diseases in
Quebec (Canada) in the early 2000s. Rural Remote Health 2010, 10:1548.
3. Probst JC, Bellinger JD, Walsemann KM, Hardin J, Glover SH: Higher risk of
death in rural blacks and whites than urbanites is related to lower
incomes, education, and health coverage. Health Aff (Millwood) 2011,
30:1872–1879.
4. DesMeules M, Pong R, Lagace C, Heng D, Manuel D, Pitblado R, Bollman R,
Guernsey J, Kazanjian A, Koren I: How Healthy Are Rural Canadians: An
Assessment Of Their Health Status And Health Determinants. Ottawa, ON:
[Canadian Institute for Health Information; 2006: https://secure.cihi.ca/](https://secure.cihi.ca/free_products/acknowledgements_rural_canadians_2006_report_e.pdf)
[free_products/acknowledgements_rural_canadians_2006_report_e.pdf.](https://secure.cihi.ca/free_products/acknowledgements_rural_canadians_2006_report_e.pdf)
Accessed 2012 Sep 01.
5. Gartner A, Farewell D, Roach P, Dunstan F: Rural/urban mortality differences
in England and Wales and the effect of deprivation adjustment. Soc Sci Med
2011, 72:1685–1694.
6. Smith KB, Humphreys JS, Wilson MGA: Addressing the health
disadvantage of rural populations: how does epidemiological evidence
inform rural health policies and research? Aust J Rural Health 2008,
16:56–66.
7. Jones A, Goza F: Rural, suburban and urban differences in the self-diagnosis
of coronary heart disease in the United States. J Biosoc Sci 2008, 40:895–909.
8. Banegas JR, Rodriguez-Artalejo F, de la Cruz Troca JJ, Guallar-Castillon P,
del Rey Calero J: Blood pressure in Spain: distribution, awareness, control,
and benefits of a reduction in average pressure. Hypertension 1998,
32:998–1002.
9. Psaltopoulou T, Orfanos P, Naska A, Lenas D, Trichopoulos D, Trichopoulou A:
Prevalence, awareness, treatment and control of hypertension in a general
population sample of 26,913 adults in the Greek EPIC study. Int J Epidemiol
2004, 33:1345–1352.
10. Gamble JM, Eurich DT, Ezekowitz JA, Kaul P, Quan H, McAlister FA: Patterns
of care and outcomes differ for urban versus rural patients with newly
diagnosed heart failure, even in a universal healthcare system. Circ Heart
Fail 2011, 4:317–323.


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 8 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



11. Teng T-HK, Katzenellenbogen JM, Hung J, Knuiman M, Sanfilippo FM,
Geelhoed E, Hobbs M, Thompson SC: Rural–urban differentials in 30-day
and 1-year mortality following first-ever heart failure hospitalisation in
Western Australia: a population-based study using data linkage. BMJ Open
2014, 4:e004724.
12. Levin KA, Leyland AH: Urban–rural inequalities in ischemic heart disease
in Scotland, 1981–1999. Am J Public Health 2006, 96:145–151.
13. Chondur R, Li SQ, Guthridge S, Lawton P: Does relative remoteness affect
chronic disease outcomes? Geographic variation in chronic disease
mortality in Australia, 2002–2006. Aust N Z J Public Health 2014, 38:117–121.
14. Goins RT, Williams KA, Carter MW, Spencer SM, Solovieva T: Perceived barriers
to health care access among rural older adults: a qualitative study. J Rural
Health 2005, 21:206–213.
15. Fordyce MA, Chen FM, Doescher MP, Hart LG: 2005 Physician Supply and
Distribution in Rural Areas of the United States. Final Report. WWAMI Rural
Health Research Center, University of Washington; 2007: Report No: 116.
[http://depts.washington.edu/uwrhrc/uploads/RHRC%20FR116%20Fordyce.pdf.](http://depts.washington.edu/uwrhrc/uploads/RHRC%20FR116%20Fordyce.pdf)
16. Aneja S, Ross JS, Wang Y, Matsumoto M, Rodgers GP, Bernheim SM, Rathore
SS, Krumholz HM: US cardiologist workforce from 1995 to 2007: modest
growth, lasting geographic maldistribution especially in rural areas.
Health Aff (Millwood) 2011, 30:2301–2309.
17. Pong RW, DesMeules M, Heng D, Lagace C, Guernsey JR, Kazanjian A,
Manuel D, Pitblado JR, Bollman R, Koren I, Dressler MP, Wang F, Luo W:
Patterns of health service utilization in rural Canada. Chronic Dis Can
2011, 31(Supp 1):1–36.
18. Sibley LM, Weiner JP: An evaluation of access to health care services along
the rural–urban continuum in Canada. BMC Health Serv Res 2011, 11:20.
19. Klepser DG, Xu L, Ullrich F, Mueller KJ: Trends in community pharmacy
counts and closures before and after the implementation of Medicare
part D. J Rural Health 2011, 27:168–175.
20. Grymonpre RE, Hawranik PG: Rural residence and prescription medication
use by community-dwelling older adults: a review of the literature. J Rural
Health 2008, 24:203–209.
21. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB, Bravata
DM, Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern SM, Heit JA,
Howard VJ, Kissela BM, Kittner SJ, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD,
Makuc DM, Marcus GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, Moy CS, Mozaffarian D,
Mussolino ME, Nichol G, Paynter NP, Soliman EZ: Heart disease and stroke
statistics–2012 update: a report from the American heart association.
Circulation 2012, 125:e2–e220.
22. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG: Preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS Med
2009, 6:e1000097.
23. von Elm E, Altman DG, Egger M, Pocock SJ, Gotzsche PC, Vandenbroucke
JP: Strengthening the reporting of observational studies in epidemiology
(STROBE) statement: guidelines for reporting observational studies. J Clin
Epidemiol 2008, 61:344–349.
24. Altman DG, Bland JM: How to obtain the confidence interval from a P value.
BMJ 2011, 343:d2090.
25. Review Manager (RevMan). [Computer program]. Version 5.1: Review
Manager (RevMan). [Computer program]. Version 5.1. Copenhagen: The
Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011.
26. Borgenstein M, Hedges LV, Higgins JPT, Rothstein HR: Multiple outcomes
or time-points within a study. In Introduction to Meta-Analysis. Chichester,
UK: John Wiley & Sons; 2009:225–238.
27. Ambardekar AV, Fonarow GC, Dai D, Peterson ED, Hernandez AF, Cannon CP,
Krantz MJ: Quality of care and in-hospital outcomes in patients with
coronary heart disease in rural and urban hospitals (from get with the
guidelines-coronary artery disease program). Am J Cardiol 2010, 105:139–143.
28. Andrus MR, Kelley KW, Murphey LM, Herndon KC: A comparison of
diabetes care in rural and urban medical clinics in Alabama. J Community
Health 2004, 29:29–44.
29. Asghari S, Courteau J, Drouin C, Gregoire JP, Carpentier AC, Paquet M,
Vanasse A: Adherence to vascular protection drugs in diabetic patients in
Quebec: a population-based analysis. Diab Vasc Dis Res 2010, 7:167–171.
30. Baldwin LM, Chan L, Andrilla CH, Huff ED, Hart LG: Quality of care for
myocardial infarction in rural and urban hospitals. J Rural Health 2010,
26:51–57.
31. Baldwin LM, MacLehose RF, Hart LG, Beaver SK, Every N, Chan L: Quality of
care for acute myocardial infarction in rural and urban US hospitals.
J Rural Health 2004, 20:99–108.



32. Bradley EH, Herrin J, Mattera JA, Holmboe ES, Wang Y, Frederick P, Roumanis SA,
Radford MJ, Krumholz HM: Hospital-level performance improvement:
beta-blocker use after acute myocardial infarction. Med Care 2004,
42:591–599.
33. Bradley EH, Herrin J, Mattera JA, Holmboe ES, Wang Y, Frederick P,
Roumanis SA, Radford MJ, Krumholz HM: Quality improvement efforts and
hospital performance: rates of beta-blocker prescription after acute
myocardial infarction. Med Care 2005, 43:282–292.
34. Byrne M, Murphy AW, Walsh JC, Shryane E, McGroarty M, Kelleher CC:
A cross-sectional study of secondary cardiac care in general practice:
impact of personal and practice characteristics. Fam Pract 2006, 23:295–302.
35. Clark RA, Eckert KA, Stewart S, Phillips SM, Yallop JJ, Tonkin AM, Krum H:
Rural and urban differentials in primary care management of chronic heart
failure: new data from the CASE study. Med J Aust 2007, 186:441–445.
36. Colleran KM, Richards A, Shafer K: Disparities in cardiovascular disease risk
and treatment: demographic comparison. J Investig Med 2007, 55:415–422.
37. Czarnecka D, Pawelec M, Kopacz E, Kloch M: Socioeconomical status of life
and regularity of intake of medicines among hypertensive patients.
Przegl Lek 2006, 63:633–636.
38. de Oliveira-Martins S, Oliveira T, Gomes JJF, Caramona M, Cabrita J: Factors
associated with arterial hypertension in pharmacy users in Portugal. Rev
Saude Publica 2011, 45:136–144.
39. Dellasega C, Orwig D, Ahern F, Lenz E: Postdischarge medication use of
elderly cardiac patients from urban and rural locations. J Gerontol A Biol
Sci Med Sci 1999, 54:M514–M520.
40. DeWilde S, Carey IM, Bremner SA, Richards N, Hilton SR, Cook DG: Evolution
of statin prescribing 1994–2001: a case of agism but not of sexism?
Heart 2003, 89:417–421.
41. DeWilde S, Carey IM, Emmas C, Richards N, Cook DG: Trends in the prevalence
of diagnosed atrial fibrillation, its treatment with anticoagulation and
predictors of such treatment in UK primary care. Heart 2006, 92:1064–1070.
42. DiMartino LD, Shea AM, Hernandez AF, Curtis LH: Use of guidelinerecommended therapies for heart failure in the medicare population.
Clin Cardiol 2010, 33:400–405.
43. Ellis C, Grubaugh AL, Egede LE: The effect of minority status and rural
residence on actions to control high blood pressure in the U.S. Public
Health Rep 2010, 125:801–809.
44. Flaker GC, McGowan DJ, Boechler M, Fortune G, Gage B: Underutilization of
antithrombotic therapy in elderly rural patients with atrial fibrillation.
Am Heart J 1999, 137:307–312.
45. Fonarow GC, French WJ, Frederick PD: Trends in the use of lipid-lowering
medications at discharge in patients with acute myocardial infarction:
1998 to 2006. Am Heart J 2009, 157:185–194.
46. Friedman O, McAlister FA, Yun L, Campbell NR, Tu K: Antihypertensive drug
persistence and compliance among newly treated elderly hypertensives in
Ontario. Am J Med 2010, 123:173–181.
47. Funkhouser E, Houston TK, Levine DA, Richman J, Allison JJ, Kiefe CI:
Physician and patient influences on provider performance: beta-blockers
in postmyocardial infarction management in the MI-Plus study.
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2011, 4:99–106.
48. Gage BF, Boechler M, Doggette AL, Fortune G, Flaker GC, Rich MW,
Radford MJ: Adverse outcomes and predictors of underuse of
antithrombotic therapy in medicare beneficiaries with chronic atrial
fibrillation. Stroke 2000, 31:822–827.
49. Goldman LE, Dudley RA: United States rural hospital quality in the hospital
compare database-accounting for hospital characteristics. Health Policy 2008,
87:112–127.
50. Hense HW, Tennis P: Changing patterns of antihypertensive drug use in a
German population between 1984 and 1987. Results of a population
based cohort study in the federal republic of Germany. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol 1990, 39:1–7.
51. Hicks PC, Bublitz Emsermann C, Westfall JM, Parnes B: Comparison of HTN
management in patients with diabetes between rural and urban primary
care clinics in Northeastern Colorado - a report from SNOCAP. Rural
Remote Health 2010, 10:1–11.
52. Huttin C: The role of different types of health insurance on access and
utilization of antihypertensive drugs: an empirical study in a US
hypertensive population. Dis Manag Health Outcome 2002, 10:419–430.
53. Ko DT, Mamdani M, Alter DA: Lipid-lowering therapy with statins in
high-risk elderly patients: the treatment-risk paradox. JAMA 2004,
291:1864–1870.


Murphy et al. BMC Public Health 2014, 14:544 Page 9 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/14/544



54. Lutfiyya MN, Bhat DK, Gandhi SR, Nguyen C, Weidenbacher-Hoper VL,
Lipsky MS: A comparison of quality of care indicators in urban acute care
hospitals and rural critical access hospitals in the United States. Int J Qual
Health Care 2007, 19:141–149.
55. Ma J, Stafford RS: Screening, treatment, and control of hypertension in
US private physician offices, 2003–2004. Hypertension 2008, 51:1275–1281.
56. Maio V, Marino M, Robeson M, Gagne JJ: Beta-blocker initiation and
adherence after hospitalization for acute myocardial infarction. Eur J
Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 2011, 18:438–445.
57. Majumdar SR, Gurwitz JH, Soumerai SB: Undertreatment of hyperlipidemia
in the secondary prevention of coronary artery disease. J Gen Intern Med
1999, 14:711–717.
58. Majumdar SR, Inui TS, Gurwitz JH, Gillman MW, McLaughlin TJ, Soumerai SB:
Influence of physician specialty on adoption and relinquishment of
calcium channel blockers and other treatments for myocardial infarction.
J Gen Intern Med 2001, 16:351–359.
59. Munschauer FE, Priore RL, Hens M, Castilone A: Thromboembolism
prophylaxis in chronic atrial fibrillation: practice patterns in community
and tertiary-care hospitals. Stroke 1997, 28:72–76.
60. Nguyen KX, Marinac JS, Sun C: Aspirin for primary prevention in patients
with diabetes mellitus. Fam Med 2005, 37:112–117.
61. Niska R, Han B: Statins for secondary cardiovascular disease prevention
for older primary care patients. J Natl Med Assoc 2009, 101:705–710.
62. Niska R, Han B: Anticoagulation for patients with atrial fibrillation in
ambulatory care settings. J Am Board Fam Med 2009, 22:299–306.
63. Obisesan TO, Vargas CM, Gillum RF: Geographic variation in stroke risk
in the United States - region, urbanization, and hypertension in the
third national health and nutrition examination survey. Stroke 2000,
31:19–25.
64. Perez-Fernandez R, Marino AF, Cadarso-Suarez C, Botana MA, Tome MA,
Solache I, Rego-Iraeta A, Mato AJ: Prevalence, awareness, treatment and
control of hypertension in Galicia (Spain) and association with related
diseases. J Hum Hypertens 2007, 21:366–373.
65. Pittrow D, Kirch W, Bramlage P, Lehnert H, Hofler M, Unger T, Sharma AM,
Wittchen HU: Patterns of antihypertensive drug utilization in primary
care. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2004, 60:135–142.
66. Rice T, Lavarreda SA, Ponce NA, Brown ER: The impact of private and public
health insurance on medication use for adults with chronic diseases.
Med Care Res Rev 2005, 62:231–249.
67. Rowan SB, Bailey DN, Bublitz CE, Anderson RJ: Trends in anticoagulation
for atrial fibrillation in the U.S.: an analysis of the national ambulatory
medical care survey database. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007, 49:1561–1565.
68. Sheikh K, Bullock C: Urban–rural differences in the quality of care for
medicare patients with acute myocardial infarction. Arch Intern Med 2001,
161:737–743.
69. Strom JL, Lynch CP, Egede LE: Rural/urban variations in diabetes self-care
and quality of care in a national sample of US adults with diabetes.
Diabetes Educ 2011, 37:254–262.
70. Tuesca-Molina R, Guallar-Castillon P, Banegas-Banegas JR, Graciani-Perez
Regadera A: Determinants of the adherence to therapeutic plan in elderly
Spaniards, over 60 years of age. Gac Sanit 2006, 20:220–227.
71. Wan Q, Harris MF, Davies GP, Jayasinghe UW, Flack J, Georgiou A, Burns JR,
Penn DL: Cardiovascular risk management and its impact in Australian
general practice patients with type 2 diabetes in urban and rural areas.
Int J Clin Pract 2008, 62:53–58.
72. Williams SC, Koss RG, Morton DJ, Schmaltz SP, Loeb JM: Case volume and
hospital compliance with evidence-based processes of care. Int J Qual
Health Care 2008, 20:79–87.
73. Wu JR, Moser DK, Rayens MK, De Jong MJ, Chung ML, Riegel B, Lennie TA:
Rurality and event-free survival in patients with heart failure. Heart Lung
2010, 39:512–520.
74. Yiannakopoulou EC, Papadopulos JS, Cokkinos DV, Mountokalakis TD:
Adherence to antihypertensive treatment: a critical factor for blood
pressure control. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 2005, 12:243–249.
75. Yusuf S, Islam S, Chow CK, Rangarajan S, Dagenais G, Diaz R, Gupta R,
Kelishadi R, Iqbal R, Avezum A, Kruger A, Kutty R, Lanas F, Lisheng L, Wei L,
Lopez-Jaramillo P, Oguz A, Rahman O, Swidan H, Yusoff K, Zatonski W,
Rosengren A, Teo KK: Use of secondary prevention drugs for cardiovascular
disease in the community in high-income, middle-income, and low-income
countries (the PURE Study): a prospective epidemiological survey.
Lancet 2011, 378:1231–1243.



76. Cramer JA, Roy A, Burrell A, Fairchild CJ, Fuldeore MJ, Ollendorf DA,
Wong PK: Medication compliance and persistence: terminology and
definitions. Value Health 2008, 11:44–47.
77. Kwan J, Razzaq A, Leiter LA, Lillie D, Hux JE: Low socioeconomic status and
absence of supplemental health insurance as barriers to diabetes care
access and utilization. Can J Diabetes 2008, 32:174–181.
78. Simpson SH, Eurich DT, Majumdar SR, Padwal RS, Tsuyuki RT, Varney J,
Johnson JA: A meta-analysis of the association between adherence to
drug therapy and mortality. BMJ 2006, 333:15.


doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-544
Cite this article as: Murphy et al.: Cardiovascular medication utilization
and adherence among adults living in rural and urban areas: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health 2014 14:544.


